Table of Contents

Into the Waiting Night 1
Character Creation 3
Psionics 29
Systems 45
Equipment and Vehicles 61
Starships 93
The History of Space 121
Sector Creation 129
Adventure Creation 173
Xenobestiary 193
Factions 211
Game Master Resources 231
Transhuman Campaigns 248
Space Magic 266
Heroic Characters 274
True Artificial Intelligences 280
Societies 290
Mechs 300
Index 314

ISBN 978-1-936673-95-7
©2017 Sine Nomine Publishing, Inc.
Written by Kevin Crawford
Cover background provided by NASA, ESA, and The Hubble Heritage Team (STScI), and edited by Jeff Brown.
Interior art by Jeff Brown, Christof Grobelski, Norah Khor, Aaron Lee, Joyce Maureira, Nick Ong, Grzegorz Pedrycz, 
and Tan Ho Sim. Some art © grandfailure / Adobe Stock.
Character sheet by Brian McGillivray



INTO THE WAITING NIGHT
Welcome, reader, to Stars Without Number, a science Stars Without Number is above all a set of tools 
fiction role-playing game. Within the pages of this for players and game masters bent on sci-fi adventure. 
book you will find all that you require to forge mighty While the setting is built to provide a wide scope for 
tales both of victory and bitter defeat amid the silent daring deeds, the game is fundamentally meant to be 
stars above. You will fashion heroes fit for this new reshaped and refocused to suit your particular interests 
age of exploration and rediscovery, men and women and desires. Whether a gritty game of desperate mer-
capable of unearthing the lost wonders of humanity’s cenary gunmen in an interstellar war zone or a dashing 
fallen empire. The scattered sectors of the old Terran campaign of star-faring adventurers in a space-operatic 
Mandate have been out of communication for centu- sector, the game is meant to fit the needs and tone of 
ries, and no one living can know all the strange won- your desired play.
ders that have been born in the Silence. Every fresh Stars Without Number belongs to the “old-school 
world is a new marvel to discover, and the brave souls renaissance” trend in gaming, and draws much of its 
willing to repair the broken web of contact can expect mechanical inspiration from the classic games of the 
rich rewards for their efforts. seventies and the work of such authors as Gary Gygax, 

Stars Without Number is not only a game of discov- Tom Moldvay, Zeb Cook, Marc Miller, and other lu-
ery, however. There are adventures to be had in more minaries of those days. While many people now prefer 
familiar places as well. New polities and young empires different mechanical frameworks for their play, these 
have sprung up in the centuries since the collapse of the “old-school” rules are understood by a tremendous 
Terran Mandate, and they struggle with each other as number of gamers and form a convenient lingua franca 

hotly as their technology and resources allow. The right between many different OSR games. These games are 
hero at the right time can shift the fate of worlds, and usually broadly compatible with each other, and allow 
heroes willing to fight for their beliefs can be the great- players to loot material from many different authors 
est resources a struggling star nation possesses. There and time periods with limited effort at conversion. 
are adventures to be had in dealing with the powers This game is also designed to be a “sandbox game”, 
of a stellar sector, where men and women are needed one built to ease the creation of active, living campaign 
to foil the sinister plans of enemies and bring victory. worlds where the PCs aren’t the only important figures, 

Not every hero has a mind for high goals, howev- and where a hero doesn’t necessarily have any narrative 
er. Many desire nothing more than freedom and the armor against failure and death. While it can certainly 
credits to enjoy it. Whether hauling cargo to backwater be played in a more conventional adventure path or 
worlds or selling their lasers to the highest bidder, these story-arc manner, Stars Without Number is stocked 
mercenary adventurers go where the pay is good and with a wide range of tools, techniques, and guidelines 
the danger is acceptable. Some have greater ideals than for easing sandbox play. The surprise and freshness 
their next patron’s pay, while others have no devotion inherent in a good sandbox game can be a refreshing 
to anything but their own interest. Stars Without Num- change of pace for many groups, and in this book you’ll 
ber has room for both kinds of heroes, and tools to help find what you need to play in that style.
a game master provide the adventures they require. The book you hold in hand right now is the re-

vised edition of the original 2010 version of the game. 
A Word to Newbies In compiling the revision, I have been careful to keep it 

compatible with the existing material for the game, so 
If Stars Without Number is your first tabletop you should be able to use original edition supplements 
role-playing game, you’re a rare soul. Most of with minimal fuss. Rather than changing the bones of 
the readers of this book will already be familiar the system, I have instead added additional material to 
with the hobby, but fear not; tabletop RPGs aren’t help GMs and entertain players, expanding the scope 
hard to understand. Just think of them as a pen- of the game. If you are reading the free PDF version of 
cil-and-paper equivalent of a computer RPG, with this game, you will find everything you need for a full 
a “game master” or “GM” in place of the computer, campaign in these pages. If you have the deluxe version 
and 2-5 players playing “player character” avatars. in hand, you will find almost a hundred pages of bonus 

You’ll need paper, pencils, and a set of poly- content to supply you with tools for transhuman sci-
hedral dice or a dice app to play the game. You fi campaigns, space-operatic heroes, stellar wizardry, 
can get gaming dice online easily. When the book mechs, artificial intelligences, and tools for building 
tells you to roll “2d10+1”, for example, it means sci-fi societies.
to roll two ten-sided dice and add them together, Above all, Stars Without Number is your game now. 
then add one to the result. “d00” means to roll two There is no one “correct” way to play it. There is only 
10-sided dice and read them as ones and tens. your way to play it, and you should feel free to make it 

the game you want to play.






CHARACTER CREATION
Before you can begin playing Stars Without Number, empire that conquered my world”. Whatever it is, it 
you need to roll up a character. While the game can should give your character an immediate reason to go 
theoretically work with just a single player and a GM, out and do something.
things work best with 2–5 friends in addition to the This will to act is especially crucial in Stars With-

GM. A lone adventurer can get in a lot of trouble out out Number, because this game is designed to support 
there, and a small group can find it hard to include all a “sandbox” style of gaming. Unlike many other games 
the different skills and talents that are often required that encourage the development of a particular story 
to survive a sticky situation. or the playing out of a specific plot line, Stars Without 

With that in mind, you and the others in your Number presents an entire interstellar sector to your 
gaming group should give a little thought to making characters and invites you to choose for yourself how 
characters that work well together. Grim loners make to experience it. Stories will arise based on what your 
good book protagonists, but they don’t survive well characters do and how they respond to the adventure 
when there’s no author around to bail them out. situations provided by the GM.

When making a character, some players like to As a player, you need to cooperate with your GM. 
simply throw the dice and see where they lead. Others This doesn’t necessarily mean following every lead and 
prefer to know a little more about the game world and hook you’re given without demurral, but it does mean 
like to have more detail provided beforehand about the that you need to respond to the situations and possi-
worlds and themes of the game. For those who’d prefer bilities that are given to you.
a more detailed discussion of the world of Stars Without You also need to keep in mind that your adven-
Number, you can skip ahead to page 120 and read up on turers exist in a very large world that is not scaled to 
it there. For the rest of you… your characters’ abilities. If you insist on throwing your 

characters into situations or challenges that seem over-
What Players Need To Know whelming, the odds are that they will overwhelm you. 
Your character is an adventurer in the year 3200, a Scouting, reconnaissance, and careful intelligence gath-
dweller among the scattered worlds of a great human ering will help you recognize no-win situations before 
diaspora. For whatever reason, he or she has decided you push ahead into them. By the same token, don’t 
to leave their old life behind and take up a starfaring hesitate to flee if your party appears to be facing certain 
existence, daring perils and seeking new frontiers in doom. A keen sense of when to decamp the field is 
search of glory, riches, or their own personal ambitions. often an experienced adventurer’s most valuable asset.

Many worlds have recovered from the despera-
tion of the centuries-long Silence, and can once again Rolling a Character
manufacture spacecraft and other advanced technology. 
Other worlds are “lost worlds”, still cut off from inter- Stars Without Number belongs to a somewhat older 
stellar trade and forced to make do with the resources tradition in tabletop RPGs, one where characters 
of their own planet. Lostworlders are often considered aren’t so much “built” as they are “rolled”. Players 
barbaric by technologically advanced worlds. often don’t know who exactly they’re going to be 

Tramp freighters, small merchant ships, and scout playing in a campaign, and rely on random rolls to 
craft serve most worlds, even the most backward. If determine a hero’s aptitudes and skills. Part of the 
your character comes from a primitive or isolated cul- pleasure of the game is throwing these new-rolled 
ture, it’s probable that he or she hitched a ride aboard cyphers into play and exploring their personalities 
such a ship to travel to a more cosmopolitan life. It may and motivations directly through the events of the 
or may not have been a voluntary choice. adventures they undertake.

In actual play, your character should be motivated In most modern games, however, a player 
to act, and to act as part of a group. The game does expects to be able to create exactly the kind of PC 
not deal well with hostile loners, apathetic brooders, or they’ve envisioned before the campaign begins. 
other characters that have to be coaxed into engaging They don’t want to rely on random rolls to give 
with the world and cooperating with the rest of the them the character they’re going to be playing.
group. The world of Stars Without Number is danger- This is a perfectly valid preference, and play-
ous, and characters who cringe from peril or insist on ers who want to have full control over creating 
facing it alone will find only boredom or an early grave. their hero can do so with an attribute array and 

Every character should have a goal from the very skills picked from a selected background. Even 
start. This might be something as simple as “become so, players without strong feelings on the matter 
wealthy beyond my fondest dreams of avarice” or “be might find it refreshing to let their hero’s past be 
known as the greatest pilot in the sector”. It might be discovered by the unpredictable chance of the dice.
as elaborate as “engineer the downfall of the interstellar 



4• Summary of Character Creation

A Summary of Character Creation

For your convenience, here’s a quick summary of the you can add two points to either Intelligence, 
character creation process. Experienced players can Wisdom, or Charisma, or divide the bonus be-
simply go down the list to generate their next interstel- tween two of them.
lar freebooter, while those new to the game can use it as 
a guide reference as they go through the steps detailed 6.	 Choose your class, representing those talents 
on the following pages. A blank character sheet can be you have that are most relevant to an adven-
found at the end of the book. turer’s lifestyle. If your hero isn’t well-described 

Note that some steps indicate that you should roll by Warrior, Expert, or Psychic, you can choose 
or pick skills, as described on page 7. The first time you Adventurer and mix your class abilities.
roll or pick a skill, it starts at level-0. The second time, 
it becomes level-1. The third time, you can instead pick 7.	 Choose your foci, representing the side talents 
any other non-psychic skill of your choice that’s less or particular specializations of your hero. You 
than level-1. No novice hero’s skills can exceed level-1 can pick one level of a focus of your choice. 
during character creation. Characters with the Expert class or the Partial 

Expert feature of the Adventurer class get one 
1.	 Roll your six attributes or assign them from an level of a non-combat, non-psychic focus for 

array, using Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, free in addition to this. They can spend both 
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Attributes levels on the same focus, starting with level 2 
reflect the basic potential of your hero. Roll 3d6 in it if they wish. Characters with the Warrior 
six times and assign them in order, or use an class or Partial Warrior feature of the Adventur-
array of 14, 12, 11, 10, 9, 7 assigned as you wish. er class can do the same in choosing one level of 
If you randomly roll your scores you may then a combat focus. 
pick one attribute to change to a score of 14.

8.	 Optionally, if your GM is allowing alien PCs or 
2.	 Mark down your attribute modifiers for each VI or True AI PCs, you can make your character 

score. When rolling dice that are affected by an into one such creature by spending your focus 
attribute, you don’t apply the whole score; in- level on the appropriate origin focus. Aliens and 
stead, you apply the attribute modifier. A score VIs are described in the Xenobestiary chapter, 
of 3 is a -2, 4—7 is a -1, 8—13 is no modifier, starting on page 192, while True AIs are part 
14—17 is +1, and 18 is +2. of the deluxe Stars Without Number core book, 

starting on page 280.
3.	 Pick a background from the list on page 9, one 

that most closely reflects your hero’s past ex- 9.	 Now pick one non-psychic skill of your choice to 
periences. You gain the skill listed under the reflect your hero’s outside interests, natural tal-
background name at level-0, which equates to ents, hobby expertise, or other personal focus.
an ordinary working knowledge of it.

10.	 If you’ve chosen the Psychic class or chosen to be 
4.	 Decide whether to roll for additional skills or an Adventurer with the Partial Psychic ability, 

pick them. If you pick skills, you can choose two you are a psychic PC, with powers described 
more skills from the Learning table for your in the following section, starting on page 28. 
background, with the exception of entries that Psychics can pick two psychic skills from those 
say “Any Skill”, which you may not pick. You listed on page 8, while Partial Psychics can pick 
cannot pick entries from the Growth table. If one. If a Psychic picks the same skill twice, they 
you’re not sure what to pick, just take the “Quick get it at level-1 expertise, and can pick a free 
Skills” listed for your background at level-0, level-1 technique from those listed for that dis-
which include your background’s beginning skill. cipline. Both Psychics and Partial Psychics get 

the level-0 abilities associated with their skills, 
5.	 If you choose to roll for your skills, you can roll up as described under each discipline they possess. 

to three times, dividing up your rolls between Both also have a maximum Effort score equal to 
the Growth and Learning tables as you wish. 1 plus their highest psychic skill plus the better of 
When you roll on the Growth table, some re- their Wisdom or Constitution modifiers.
sults may say “+2 Physical” or “+2 Mental”. In 
the former case, you can add two points to ei- 11.	 Roll your maximum hit points on 1d6, adding 
ther Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution, or one your Constitution modifier. Even a penalty can’t 
point to two different stats. In the latter case, reduce your hit points below 1. Warrior PCs 



Summary of Character Creation •5 

Stars Without Number Character Sheet
Name 18 Administer Pilot Work Hitpoints / Conditions Max: Attributes

Connect Program Biopsionics 3 (-2)  |  4-7 (-1)  |  8-13 (+0)  |  14-17 (+1)  |  18 (+2)
Background

Exert Punch Metapsionics
STR

Fix Shoot Precognition 11 1, 2
3 Heal 4Sneak, 5, 9 Telekinesis

(1D6 + Con) x Level Warriors:  Additional +2 per level DEX
Know Stab Telepathy
Lead Survive Teleportation System Strain Permanent:

Class CON
Notice Talk

6 Perform Trade
INT

+3sp per lvl  (Experts: +1 bonus non-combat) Cost:  new value + 1 Max:  +2 at lvl 3  |  +3 at lvl 6  |  +4 at lvl 9 Max = CON

Level XP
Warrior  =  +Lvl  |  Other  =  +(Lvl ÷ 2) Saves WIS

Base Atk Bonus + Skill Points
Partial Warr1ior2  =  +1 at lvl 1 & lvl 5 Physical Evasion Mental

Homeworld Lvl 2 = 3xp Lvl 7 = 39xp
Lvl 3 = 6xp Lvl 8 = 54xp CHA

Foci +1 Focus at lvl 2, lvl 5, lvl 7 & lvl 10
Employer 17

Lvl 4 = 12xp Lvl 9 = 72xp
Boosts:   1st: 1sp (lvl 1)  |  2nd: 2sp (lvl 1)

Lvl 5 = 18xp Lvl 10 = 93xp Lvl 16 - lvl - [Str | Con] 16 - lvl - [Dex | Int] 16 - lvl -[Wis | Cha] 3rd: 3sp (lvl 3)  |  4th: 4sp (lvl 6)  |  5th: 5sp (lvl 9)
Species Lvl 6 = 27xp Lvl 11+ = +24

Cybernetics / Innate Abilities
Weapons                                                                                     Range and Ammo              Total Atk Bonus

Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods 14, 15 7,8 Psionic Techniques +1 on new Psychic Skill Lvl  
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl 10

Name
+

Mods
Readied Items Max Enc  =  STR ÷ 2

Armor

Name AC 13
Mods

Name AC

16 Psionic Effort Effort: 1 + Highest Psychic Skill + Highest of Wis or Con Max:
Mods

Credits Debts
Name AC

Mods

and Adventurers with the Partial Warrior class 16.	 Record your Armor Class, the measure of how 
option add 2 points to this total. Hit points in- hard it is to hurt your hero in a fight. Different 
dicate how close your hero is to being defeated. suits of armor grant different Armor Classes; if 

you aren’t wearing any armor at all, your base 
12.	 Note down any base attack bonus you may have. AC is 10. Add your Dexterity modifier to this. In 

The higher the attack bonus, the easier it is for order to hurt your PC, an enemy has to roll an 
your hero to land a telling blow or shot on a attack roll on a d20, adding their attack bonus 
hostile opponent. For most PCs, this bonus is and equaling or exceeding your Armor Class. 
+0. If you are a Warrior or an Adventurer with 
the Partial Warrior class option, it’s +1. 17.	 Note down your beginning saving throw scores 

for your Physical, Evasion, and Mental saving 
13.	 Choose one of the equipment packages on page 25 throws. Physical saves against poison, disease, 

or roll 2d6 x 100 to find out how many starting or exhaustion are 15 minus the best of your 
credits you have with which to buy gear. Strength or Constitution modifiers. Evasion 

saves to dodge sudden perils or dive away from 
14.	 Mark down your total hit bonus with your weap- explosives are 15 minus the best of your Intelli-

onry. This is equal to your base attack bonus, gence and Dexterity modifiers. Mental saves to 
plus either your Punch, Stab, or Shoot skill de- resist psychic influence or mind-bending tech-
pending on the kind of weapon it is, plus your nology are 15 minus the best of your Wisdom or 
relevant attribute modifier. The weapon tables Charisma modifiers. To resist these perils, you 
starting on page 66 will tell you what attribute need to equal or beat the save on a d20.
is used for a particular weapon. If two attributes 
are listed, use the best one for your hero. If you 18.	 Lastly, wrap up your PC with a name and a goal. 
haven’t even got level-0 skill, take a -2 penalty. Every hero needs to have a goal when they set 

out adventuring. This goal might change, but 
15.	 Note down the damage done by your weapons. your PC should always have some reason to go 

This is equal to its base damage dice plus its at- out and interact with the world before them. 
tribute modifier. If it’s a Punch weapon, you can Stay-at-home PCs and those unwilling to dare 
add your Punch skill as well. greatly for their aims are rarely fun to play.



6• Attributes

Attributes

The first step in creating a character is to determine Attribute Affects....
the character’s six attributes. Attributes describe how 

Strength Physical prowess, melee combat, 
strong, quick, clever, perceptive, hardy, or charming carrying gear, brute force
your hero might be. Attributes are measured by scores 
ranging from 3 to 18, with 3 reflecting an attribute Dexterity Speed, evasion, manual dexterity, 
so weak that the PC is barely fit for adventuring and reaction time, combat initiative
an 18 marking the maximum possible aptitude for an Constitution Hardiness, enduring injury, resisting 
ordinary human. toxins, going without food or sleep

To generate a character’s attributes, roll 3d6 six Intelligence Memory, reasoning, technical skills, 
times and assign the results in order to Strength, Dex- general education
terity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charis-

Wisdom Noticing things, making judgments, 
ma. You may then change one attribute of your choice reading situations, intuition
to 14 if you wish to ensure that your new adventurer 
is gifted in at least one way. Charisma Commanding, charming, attracting 

If you prefer not to roll, you may instead assign attention, being taken seriously
the following scores to your attributes in any order you 
wish: 14, 12, 11, 10, 9, and 7. If you assign your scores, 
you cannot replace one of them with a 14.

Attribute Score Modifier
Once you’ve assigned your attributes, record the 

modifier for each of them. This modifier is applied to 3 -2

relevant skill checks or other rolls related to the attri- 4—7 -1

bute. If your attribute score changes during play, ei- 8—13 +0
ther from some crippling injury or from improvements 

14—17 +1
granted by your background or experience, you should 
make sure to update any changed modifier. 18 +2

Rolling a PC’s Attributes
Simon’s rolling up a character for a new campaign. Simon takes three six-sided dice in hand and 
The first step is to figure out what kind of hero he’s rolls them six times, assigning each number in order 
going to be playing in the upcoming game, and that to his Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, 
means determining attributes. Wisdom, and Charisma scores. His results are 10, 4, 

If Simon had a particular concept he knew he 13, 16, 8, and 7.
wanted to play, choosing to use the array might be Since 10 or 11 is an average human score, Simon 
a good idea. It provides a predictable set of numbers can see that this PC has a very considerable intel-
he can put in whatever order he wishes, and unless lect counterbalanced by pronounced clumsiness and 
his concept requires that his PC be particularly gifted poor social skills. Because he rolled his statistics, he 
in more than one attribute, the 14 that’s part of the can replace one of the rolls with a score of 14. After 
array would ensure that he was capable in whatever some consideration, Simon decides that swapping 
natural aptitude was most important to the concept. out his bad Dexterity score makes the most sense.

On the other hand, even if he rolls the dice, he Now Simon notes down the attribute modifi-
knows his hero is going to be good at something. He ers for each of his scores: a Strength of 10 is +0, a 
can put that free 14 in any attribute he wishes, so if Dexterity of 14 is +1, a Constitution of 13 is +0, an 
all he cares about is making sure his PC is quick, he Intelligence of 16 is +1, a Wisdom of 8 is +0, and a 
can rest assured that random rolling will still pro- Charisma of 7 is -1.
duce a quick PC. When rolling skill checks, attack rolls, or other 

Simon, however, really doesn’t have any partic- things modified by an attribute, Simon will be using 
ular concept he knows he wants to play for this cam- the modifier rather than the full attribute score. The 
paign. He decides he’s going to let the dice determine scores themselves might change a little due to his 
what kind of hero he’s going to play. Letting the dice hero’s background or future personal training, but 
make the decision helps him break out of any ruts he mostly they’ll serve as cues for playing the PC. With 
might be in when it comes to character concepts, and a Wisdom of 8, for example, Simon’s hero might not 
it can make him consider ideas that might be fresher have a penalty to rolls, but he probably makes the 
in play than his usual fare. occasional decision he lives to regret.



Skills •7 

Skills

Your hero’s learned capabilities are skills, and every 
star-faring adventurer has their share of them. A hero Skill Checks
can usually attempt to do anything, whether it’s to Your hero is assumed to be competent at all the ordi-
climb a sun-scorched cliff on an alien world, talk down nary functions of their role and background. If he’s a 
an enraged lostworlder warlord, or fire a mag rifle at moisture farmer from a back-of-nowhere desert world, 
a charging xenomorph, but having the right skill can he’s going to know how to keep a dew still running and 
make a vast difference in results. how to put on a coolsuit. If she’s a corporate magnate’s 

Skills are measured in a rating from level-0 for succession-groomed daughter from a megacorp-dom-
competent practitioners to level-4 for the best in the inated hiveworld, she’s going to know how to read a 
sector. Novice heroes start with level-0 or level-1 in balance sheet and speak during a meeting with C-level 
their skills. You’ll choose or roll skills in the next sec- executives. They will never fail at these basic tasks un-
tion, when you select a background for your character. less some situation makes them much harder than usual.

Sometimes, however, the hero will be faced with 
Skill Level a situation outside their usual experience, or will try 

to accomplish a normal task while under considerable 
Level-0 Basic competence in the skill, such as strain or disadvantage. In those cases, you’ll need to 

an ordinary practitioner would have roll a skill check.
Level-1 An experienced professional in the To roll a skill check, roll 2d6 and add the most 

skill, clearly better than most applicable attribute modifier and skill level. If the total 
Level-2 Veteran expert, one respected even is equal or greater than the difficulty of the check, you 

by those with considerable experience succeed. If less, something goes wrong, or you fail out-
Level-3 Master of the skill, likely one of the right in the attempt, or something unexpected happens.

best on the planet If you haven’t even got level-0 in the relevant skill 
you take a -1 penalty to the roll. Some particularly tech-

Level-4 Superlative expertise, one of the best nical or difficult feats might not be achievable at all 
in the entire stellar sector. without some grounding in the skill.



8• Attributes

The Skill List Pilot: Use this skill to pilot vehicles or ride beasts. Roll 
The following skills are standard choices for most cam- it to fly spaceships, drive vehicles, ride animals, 
paigns. Games set in unusual reaches of space or unique or tend to basic vehicle repair. This skill doesn’t 
settings might alter this list. help you with things entirely outside the scope 

Skills are general, and some of them may overlap of your background or experience, though with 
in some situations. A hero trying to clear a jammed dis- some practice a PC can expand their expertise.
ruptor cannon before the aliens break through the door Program: Operating or hacking computing and com-
might plausibly check either Fix to repair it or Shoot to munications hardware. Roll it to program or hack 
represent their familiarity with weapons maintenance. computers, control computer-operated hardware, 
Assuming the GM agrees, you can roll whichever skill operate communications tech, or decrypt things.
is better for you. Punch: Use it as a combat skill when fighting unarmed. 

If your PC means to make a habit of this rather 
Administer: Manage an organization, handle paper- than as a recourse of desperation, you should take 

work, analyze records, and keep an institution the Unarmed Fighter focus described later.
functioning on a daily basis. Roll it for bureau- Shoot: Use it as a combat skill when using ranged weap-
cratic expertise, organizational management, le- onry, whether hurled rocks, bows, laser pistols, 
gal knowledge, dealing with government agencies, combat rifles, or ship’s gunnery.
and understanding how institutions really work. Sneak: Move without drawing notice. Roll it for stealth, 

Connect: Find people who can be helpful to your pur- disguise, infiltration, manual legerdemain, pick-
poses and get them to cooperate with you. Roll pocketing, and the defeat of security measures.
it to make useful connections with others, find Stab: Use it as a combat skill when wielding melee 
people you know, know where to get illicit goods weapons, whether primitive or complex.
and services, and be familiar with foreign cultures Survive: Obtain the basics of food, water, and shelter 
and languages. You can use it in place of Talk for in hostile environments, along with avoiding their 
persuading people you find via this skill. natural perils. Roll it to handle animals, navigate 

Exert: Apply trained speed, strength, or stamina in difficult terrain, scrounge urban resources, make 
some feat of physical exertion. Roll it to run, jump, basic tools, and avoid wild beasts or gangs.
lift, swim, climb, throw, and so forth. You can use Talk: Convince other people of the facts you want them 
it as a combat skill when throwing things, though to believe. What they do with that conviction may 
it doesn’t qualify as a combat skill for other ends. not be completely predictable. Roll it to persuade, 

Fix: Create and repair devices both simple and complex. charm, or deceive others in conversation.
How complex will depend on your character’s Trade: Find what you need on the market and sell what 
background; a lostworlder blacksmith is going to you have. Roll it to sell or buy things, figure out 
need some study time before he’s ready to fix that where to purchase hard-to-get or illicit goods, deal 
broken fusion reactor, though he can do it eventu- with customs agents, or run a business.
ally. Roll it to fix things, build things, and identify Work: This is a catch-all skill for professions not repre-
what something is supposed to do. sented by other skills. Roll it to work at a particular 

Heal: Employ medical and psychological treatment for profession, art, or trade.
the injured or disturbed. Roll it to cure diseases, 
stabilize the critically injured, treat psychological Psychic Skills
disorders, or diagnose illnesses. Unlike other skills, psychic skills are restricted to char-

Know: Know facts about academic or scientific fields. acters with the Psychic class or the Partial Psychic class 
Roll it to understand planetary ecologies, remem- option for Adventurers. You cannot choose or roll 
ber relevant history, solve science mysteries, and these skills in character creation unless specifically told 
know the basic facts about rare or esoteric topics. to pick a psychic skill.

Lead: Convince others to also do whatever it is you’re 
trying to do. Talk might persuade them that fol- Biopsionics: Master powers of physical repair, body aug-
lowing you is smart, but Lead can make them do mentation, and shapeshifting.
it even when they think it’s a bad idea. Roll it to Metapsionics: Master powers that nullify, boost, and 
lead troops in combat, convince others to follow shape the use of other psychic abilities.
you, or maintain morale and discipline. Precognition: Master the ability to sense future events 

Notice: Spot anomalies or interesting facts about your and control probability.
environment. Roll it for searching places, detect- Telekinesis: Master the remote control of kinetic energy 
ing ambushes, spotting things, and reading the to move objects and fabricate force constructs.
emotional state of other people. Telepathy: Master the reading and influencing of other 

Perform: Exhibit some performative skill. Roll it to sapient minds.
dance, sing, orate, act, or otherwise put on a con- Teleportation: Master the arts of physical translocation 
vincing or emotionally moving performance. of yourself and allies.



backgrounds •9 

Choosing a Background

It’s unlikely that your character sprang forth full-grown 
from the endless depths of space, so it’s probable that he Training Skills and Attributes
or she had some sort of background before adventuring When your character is allowed to pick or roll a skill, 
and some kind of training in a field suitable for the life you learn it at level-0 expertise the first time you re-
of an interstellar wayfarer. Of course, the call of adven- ceive it. If you receive it a second time, it becomes lev-
ture is somewhat indiscriminate, and some people from el-1. If some mechanic or skill choice allows or obliges 
very unlikely walks of life might find themselves hurled you to pick it a third time, you can instead choose any 
into the potentially-lethal excitement of deep space. To non-psychic skill in its place. The only way to raise 
determine your hero’s past training, you need to choose psychic skills during character creation is via special 
or roll a background. abilities or foci that specifically boost them. No starting 

A background is simply a thumbnail description character can begin with a skill level higher than level-1.
of the kind of life your hero lived before they took up Sometimes you’re allowed to pick “Any Skill”. This 
adventuring. It may not have been the only thing they means you can choose any non-psychic skill to improve. 
did with their life, but it’s the thing that taught them Other entries that read “Any Combat” mean that you 
most of their existing skills. can pick either Stab, Shoot, or Punch as you choose. 

When you’ve chosen or rolled your background, You cannot raise psychic skills with “Any Skill” picks.
take a moment to think about your character’s past. Rolls on the Growth table that improve your basic 
Decide how your character came to take up that pro- attributes can boost them up to a maximum of 18. A 
fession, and what made them put it down to follow a bonus that applies to “Any Stat” can be applied to any 
more adventurous lifestyle. Did they do it for excite- attribute. If the roll says to add the bonus to Physical at-
ment? Friendship? Money? Or were they just running tributes, you can add the bonus to either Strength, Dex-
from a situation they couldn’t handle? terity, or Constitution. If the roll says to add a bonus 

You will also want to pick a homeworld for your to your Mental attributes, you can apply the points to 
PC. Your GM can give you some suggestions for worlds either Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma. If the bonus 
in their campaign that would fit your character concept, is +2, you may split the points between two different 
or you might simply make up your own homeworld or attributes of the appropriate type if you wish.
native space habitat with the GM’s permission, as you 
might be from some far-distant sector of space. d20 Background

Twenty backgrounds are provided on the follow-
ing pages. You may roll randomly to see where your 1 Barbarian, born of a primitive world
hero comes from, or pick one that suits you. If none of 2 Clergy, a consecrated man or woman
the backgrounds appeal to you, you can simply describe 3 Courtesan, trading on pleasurable company
your hero’s prior life to the GM and pick any three 
skills that fit that past. 4 Criminal. thief, rogue, liar, or worse

5 Dilettante, with money if not purpose
Backgrounds, Skills, and Growth 6 Entertainer, artful and beguiling
Once you pick a background, your hero gains several 

7 Merchant, whether peddler or far trader
skills associated with their past.

First, you get the free skill associated with the 8 Noble, by blood or by social capital
background. Every member of that role or profession 9 Official, a functionary of some greater state
needs this skill to function competently, so your hero 

10 Peasant, whether primitive or high-tech
gets it as well.

Next, you may either pick two other skills from 11 Physician, a healer of the sick and maimed
the Learning table for your background, or make three 12 Pilot, or rider, or sailor, or vehicle-driver
random rolls divided between the Growth and Learn-

13 Politician, aspiring to leadership and control
ing tables. If you pick skills, you can select exactly the 
talents you want for your hero, while going with ran- 14 Scholar, a scientist or academic
dom rolls allows your character a little wider range of 15 Soldier, whether mercenary or conscript
competence and the option of attribute improvements 16 Spacer, dwelling in the deep-space habs
at the cost of perfect control over their development. If 
you pick skills, you may pick the same skill twice if you 17 Technician, artisan, engineer, or builder
wish, to improve its starting proficiency. 18 Thug, ruffian, or strong arm of the people

If you’re not sure what to pick, just take the three 19 Vagabond, roaming without a home
skills listed under “Quick Skills” for your background. 
They’re the ones most critical to the profession. 20 Worker, a cube drone or day laborer



10• backgrounds

Barbarian
Standards of barbarism vary when many worlds Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
are capable of interstellar spaceflight, but your 
hero comes from a savage world of low technology Survive-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
and high violence. Their planet may have survived 2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
an all-consuming war, or been deprived of critical Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
materials or energy resources, or simply have been Survive-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Lead
colonized by confirmed Luddites. Other barbarians 
might be drawn from the impoverished underclass Notice-0 5 Exert 5 Notice
of advanced worlds or the technologically-degen- Any Combat-0 6 Any Skill 6 Punch
erate inheritors of some high-tech space station or 7 Sneak
planetary hab.

8 Survive

Clergy
Faith is nigh-universal among human civilizations, 

Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
and your hero is dedicated to one such belief. Some 
clergy are conventional priests or priestesses, while Talk-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
others might be cloistered monastics or nuns, or 2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
more martial warrior-monks. Modern-day faiths Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Know
such as Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, Talk-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Lead
Buddhism, and other creeds all exist in various sec-
tors, often in altered form, while some worlds have Perform-0 5 Connect 5 Notice
developed entirely new deities or faiths. If you’d like Know-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
to create your own religion, you can work with the 7 Talk
GM to define its characteristic beliefs.

8 Talk

Building a Background for a PC
Simon’s got his hero’s attributes set, but those are just His first roll is on the Growth table, and it 
part of making a character. He also needs to figure comes up “+2 Mental”. He immediately puts it into 
out where this hero came from, and what kind of Intelligence, raising the score to 18 and giving it a +2 
life they’ve led before they took up the mantle of an modifier instead of +1. Basil is a brilliant man.
adventuring existence. His second roll he makes on the Learning table, 

If he had a particular preference for a back- and it comes up “Know”. He already has Know at 
ground, he could simply pick one of the list on page level-0, so now he gets Know-1. His third roll comes 
9. If none of those fit, he could just write down a up “Talk”, giving him Talk-0.
few sentences about the background he did want and A brief view of Basil’s history shows him as a 
pick three skills that fit it, assuming the GM agreed brilliant young scholar with a keenly refined mind, 
it made sense, or rolled on the existing background an excellent grasp of intellectual topics, and enough 
tables that best fit their custom past. But Simon is glibness to get through a thesis defense. Simon de-
still uncertain about the nature of his hero, so he cides that Basil’s occasional fits of social ineptitude 
decides to roll randomly for a background. have torpedoed his career in academia, however, and 

He gets a 15, so his hero is a scholar. As a scholar, have forced him out into the world to make a living 
he automatically gets the Know skill at level-0, and as an interstellar freebooter.
needs to decide what kind of scholar he is. Simon Simon also needs to pick a homeworld for Basil. 
considers his options and decides to go with some- While he could ask the GM for a list of likely places, 
thing he knows; his PC is a literature post-doc by the he decides that Basil hails from the cold and inhospi-
name of Basil Hayes. table world of Karelia, a planet that relies mostly on 

Simon decides that Basil should continue with trading the long-duty service contracts of its citizens 
his random rolling rather than just choosing two to other, wealthier worlds in exchange for vital tech. 
more skills from the Learning table for a scholar. The GM thinks that Karelia sounds like the sort of 
Because he chooses to randomly roll, he can make world that would fit in the campaign, and so allows 
three rolls, splitting them as he wishes between the it. Simon can make up any other details of the world 
Learning or the Growth table. that are needed as the campaign plays out.



backgrounds •11 

Courtesan
Your hero’s career was one of proffered pleasure. Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Simple prostitution is one form of this background, 
perhaps as an ordinary streetwalker, a part-time Perform-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
amateur with bills to pay, or an expensive com- 2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
panion to the wealthy, but other forms of satisfac- Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Exert
tion exist among the many worlds. Refined artists Perform-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
of conversation and grace command high fees in 
some societies, while others pay well for the sim- Notice-0 5 Connect 5 Perform
ple company of certain men and women with the Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Survive
right bloodlines, special appearance, or auspicious 7 Talk
personal qualities esteemed by their culture. 8 Trade

Criminal
Whether thief, murderer, forger, smuggler, spy, or 

Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
some other variety of malefactor, your hero was a 
criminal. Some such rogues are guilty only of cross- Sneak-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
ing some oppressive government or offending a 2  +2 Mental 2 Any Combat
planetary lord, while others have done things that Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Connect
no civilized society could tolerate. Still, their ability Sneak-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Notice
to deal with the most desperate and dangerous of 
contacts and navigate the perils of a less-than-legal Connect-0 5 Connect 5 Program
adventure can make them attractive associates for a Talk-0 6 Any Skill 6 Sneak
party of freebooters bent on profit and glory more 7 Talk
than strict legality.

8 Trade

Dilettante
Your hero never had a profession, strictly speaking, 
but spent their formative years in travel, socializing, Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning

and a series of engaging hobbies. They might have Connect-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Skill
been the scion of a wealthy industrialist, a planetary 2  +1 Any Stat 2 Any Skill
noble’s younger offspring, or a hanger-on to some- Quick Skills 3  +1 Any Stat 3 Connect
one with the money and influence they lacked. By 
the time your hero’s adventures start, they’ve run Connect-0 4  +1 Any Stat 4 Know
through the money that once fueled their lifestyle. Know-0 5 Connect 5 Perform
Extreme measures may be necessary to acquire fur- Talk-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
ther funding. 7 Talk

8 Trade

Entertainer
Singers, dancers, actors, poets, writers… the inter- Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
stellar reaches teem with artists of unnumbered Perform-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
styles and mediums, some of which are only physi-
cally possible with advanced technological support. 2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
Your hero was a dedicated entertainer, one likely Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Exert
focused in a particular form of art. Patrons and Perform-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
talent scouts can be temperamental, however, and Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Perform
sometimes a budding artist needs to take steps to 
find their audience. Or at least, to find their audi- Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
ence’s money. 7 Sneak

8 Talk



12• backgrounds

Merchant
Your hero was or is a trader. Some merchants are Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
mere peddlers and shopkeepers on primitive, low- Trade-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
tech worlds, while others are daring far traders 
who venture to distant worlds to bring home their 2  +2 Mental 2 Any Combat
alien treasures. The nature of trade varies widely Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
among worlds. On some of them, it’s a business of Trade-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Fix
soberly-dressed men and women ticking off trades Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Know
on virtual terminals, while on others it is a more… 
active pursuit, requiring the judicious application of Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
monoblades and deniable gunfire against compet- 7 Trade
itors. Sometimes a deal goes bad or capital needs 8 Talk
to be raised, and a merchant’s natural talents are 
turned toward the perils of adventure.

Noble
Many planets are ruled by a class of nobles, and your Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
hero was a member of one such exalted group. Such Lead-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
planets are often worlds of exquisite courtesy al-
loyed with utterly remorseless violence, and a mis- 2  +2 Mental 2 Any Combat
placed word at the morning levee can result in an Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
executioner’s monoblade at noon. Your hero has Lead-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Know
done something or been the victim of something to 
dislodge them from their comfortable place at court. Connect-0 5 Connect 5 Lead
Without their familiar allies, wealth, or influence, Administer-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
they must take a new place in the world, however 7 Pilot
distasteful that claiming might be. 8 Talk

Official
Most advanced worlds run on their bureaucra- Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
cies, the legions of faceless men and women who Administer-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
fill unnumbered roles in keeping the government 
running as it should. Your hero was one such offi- 2  +2 Mental 2 Any Skill
cial. Some were law enforcement officers, others Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
government office clerks or tax officials or trade Administer-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Know
inspectors. However necessary the work may be, 

Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Lead
it is often of unendurably tedious nature, and any 
man or woman with an adventurous spark to their Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
blood will soon find themselves desperate for more 7 Talk
exciting use of their talents. 8 Trade

Peasant
A technologically-advanced world can usually pro- Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
duce all its necessary foodstuffs and basic resources Exert-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Connect
with a handful of workers, the bulk of the labor be-
ing performed by agricultural bots. On more prim- 2  +2 Physical 2 Exert
itive worlds, or those with a natural environment Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Fix
that requires close personal attention to crops, a Exert-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
class of peasants will emerge. These men and wom-

Sneak-0 5 Exert 5 Sneak
en often become chattel, part and parcel of the land 
they occupy and traded among their betters like the Survive-0 6 Any Skill 6 Survive
farm equipment of richer worlds. Your hero was 7 Trade
not satisfied with that life, and has done something 8 Work
to break free from their muddy and toilsome past.



backgrounds •13 

Physician
Bodies wear and break, even on worlds that pos- Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
sess the full resources of advanced postech medicine. Heal-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
Your hero was a physician, one trained to cure the 
maladies of the body or the afflictions of the mind. 2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
Some physicians are conventional health workers, Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Fix
while others are ship’s surgeons, military medics, Heal-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Heal
missionary healers of an expanding faith, or dubi- Know-0 5 Connect 5 Know
ous slum doctors who’ll graft over laser burns with 
no awkward questions asked. Wherever men and Notice-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
women go into danger, however, the skills of a phy- 7 Talk
sician are eagerly sought. 8 Trade

Pilot
A pilot’s role is a broad one in the far future. The Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
most glamorous and talented navigate starships Pilot-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Connect
through the metadimensional storms of interstellar 
space, while less admired figures fly the innumera- 2  +2 Physical 2 Exert
ble intra-system shuttles and atmosphere craft that Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Fix
serve in most advanced systems. On other worlds, Pilot-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Notice
this career might reflect a long-haul trucker, or a 

Fix-0 5 Connect 5 Pilot
horse-riding messenger, or an intrepid sailor on an 
alien sea. As the Pilot skill covers all these modes Shoot or Trade-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
of transport, any character whose role revolves 7 Shoot
around vehicles or riding beasts might justify their 8 Trade
selection of this career.



14• backgrounds

Politician
The nature of a political career varies from world Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
to world. On some, it’s much like one we’d recog- Talk-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
nize, with glad-handing voters, loud rallies, and 
quiet back room deals with supposed rivals in 2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
government. On others, it might involve a great Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
deal more ceremonial combat, appeals to councils Talk-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Lead
of elders, and success at ritual trials. Whatever the 
details, your hero was a politician in their home Lead-0 5 Connect 5 Notice
culture. Something went wrong, though, and the Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
only way to fix it is to get clear of your constitu- 7 Talk
ents for a while and seek some alternative means 8 Talk
of advancement.

Scholar
Scientists, sages, and professors all qualify under Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
this career. Your hero was one such, a man or Know-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
woman with a life dedicated to knowledge and un-

2
derstanding. It might have involved the technical  +2 Mental 2 Connect
expertise of a metadimensional structures engineer Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Fix
or the sacred memorization of the chronicles of Know-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Know
some lostworlder sage-order, but your hero’s life Connect-0 5 Connect 5 Notice
was in learning. Sometimes that learning cannot be 
found in familiar surroundings, however, and for Administer-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
one reason or another, willing or not, your hero 7 Program
must venture out into the wider world. 8 Talk

Soldier
Whatever the technology or structure of their par- Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
ent world, a soldier’s work is universal. Your hero 
was a professional fighter, whether that took the Any Combat-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
form of a barbarian noble’s thegn, a faceless con- 2  +2 Physical 2 Any Combat
script in a planetary army, or an elite soldier in the Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
service of a megacorp’s private military. Whether it Any Combat-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Fix
was because they were on the losing side, choosing 
to leave the service, or being forced to flee a cause Exert-0 5 Exert 5 Lead
they couldn’t fight for, they now find themselves Survive-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
navigating a world where their most salable skill 7 Sneak
is one that can cause them a great deal of trouble.

8 Survive

Spacer
Almost every advanced world is highly dependent Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
upon the resources that space flight brings them. Fix-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
Some of this work can be automated, but every re-

2
ally important task needs a flexible human operator  +2 Physical 2 Connect
to oversee the work. Your hero is one such spacer, Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
either a worker who toils in the sky or a native void- Fix-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Fix
born man or woman who has spent their entire Pilot-0 5 Exert 5 Know
life outside of natural gravity. It’s not uncommon 
for such workers to find better prospects in places Program-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
where they can breathe without a vacc suit. 7 Program

8 Talk



backgrounds •15 

Technician
Old things break and new things need to be made. Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Whether a humble lostworlder blacksmith or an 
erudite astronautic engineer, your hero made a ca- Fix-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
reer out of building and mending the fruits of tech- 2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
nology. While almost every society has a need for Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Exert
such services, not all of them treat their providers as Fix-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Fix
generously as a technician might wish. Sometimes, 
these same talents can be turned toward less licit Exert-0 5 Connect 5 Fix
ends, and a skilled technician’s expertise is always Notice-0 6 Any Skill 6 Know
useful to an adventuring group that plans to rely on 7 Notice
anything more sophisticated than a sharpened stick.

8 Pilot

Thug
Your hero was a bruiser. They might have had a no- Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
tional allegiance to some so-called “army”, or have Any Combat-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
been part of some crime boss’ strong-arm crew, or 

2
simply been a private contractor of misfortune for  +2 Mental 2 Connect
those who failed to pay up. They might have even Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
been a fist in a righteous cause, defending their Any Combat-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
neighborhood from hostile outsiders or serving as Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Sneak
informal muscle for a local leader in need of pro-
tection. Whatever the details, they’ve had to move Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Stab or Shoot
on from their old life, and their new one is likely to 7 Survive
involve a similar application of directed force. 8 Talk

Vagabond
A dilettante has money and friends; your hero sim- Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
ply has the road. Whether they were knocked loose 
from polite society at a young age or have recently Survive-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
found themselves cast out of a familiar life, they 2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
now roam the ways of the world and the spaces be- Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Notice
tween. Some heroes find this life satisfying, with its Survive-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Perform
constant novelty and the regular excitement of bare 
survival. Others long for a more stable arrangement, Sneak-0 5 Exert 5 Pilot
and are willing to lend their pragmatic talents to a Notice-0 6 Any Skill 6 Sneak
group that offers some prospect of profit. 7 Survive

8 Work

Worker
Countless in number, every industrialized world Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
has swarms of workers to operate the machines and Work-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
perform the labor that keeps society functioning. 

2
Cooks, factory laborers, mine workers, personal  +1 Any Stat 2 Any Skill
servants, lawyers, clerks, and innumerable other Quick Skills 3  +1 Any Stat 3 Connect
roles are covered under this career. If your hero Connect-0 4  +1 Any Stat 4 Exert
rolls or picks Work as a skill but has a career that Exert-0 5 Exert 5 Fix
would better fit another existing skill, they may sub-
stitute it accordingly. Thus, a wage-slave program- Work-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
mer might take Program instead of Work, while a 7 Program
lawyer would use Administer instead as a reflection 8 Work
of their litigious talent.



16• Character Classes

Character Classes

In one way or another, your character is cut out for troubled by anything worse than portside brawls, but 
adventure. Your hero might be a veteran combatant, inside her burns a seething, latent fury that is ready to 
skilled with blade or laser, or they might be a psychic explode at the first opportunity. She’s a Warrior, even 
gifted with uncanny abilities. It’s just as possible that though she might not realize her talents until the first 
they could have remarkable talents as a pilot, or be time she snatches up a dropped laser rifle and unleashes 
the smoothest grifter in the hive-slum they grew up a barrage of death on a pack of alien warbeasts. You 
in. Whatever their particular background, your hero’s should pick whatever class for your hero that matches 
primary focus is their class. the kind of play you want to have with them.

Your class represents your hero’s best set of tools There are four possible classes you can choose for 
for dealing with their problems. They’re the skills and your hero: Adventurer, Expert, Psychic, and Warrior. 
capabilities that they’re most likely to turn to to resolve Experts are PCs that rely on non-combat skills such as 
a problem, but not their only tools. A Psychic can still stealth, persuasion, technical expertise, piloting skills, 
shoot a gun and a Warrior can try to fast-talk a mark. vast learning, or personal connections. Psychics are 

Choosing a class helps ensure that your hero is those rare men and women affected by Metadimen-
good at something that might contribute to a bold party sional Extroversion Syndrome, ones capable of chan-
of interstellar adventurers. Experts always have a knack neling these metadimensional energies to perform 
at exercising non-combat skills, Warriors are always feats of telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and other 
good in a scrap, and Psychics always have a unique psionic disciplines. Warriors are hardened combatants, 
power or two to employ at need. Your hero might have skilled in the arts of war and violent conflict, and Ad-
led a quiet life as a starport customs clerk until recently, venturers include those with a mix of talents and abili-
but their natural talents will ensure that they can do ties, ones who don’t fit well into one of the other classes.
something that the rest of the group will find useful. Choose a class that best fits your character’s con-

In the same vein, you don’t have to choose a class cept. If Expert, Psychic, or Warrior don’t fit your image 
that “naturally” fits with your background. That star- of your hero, or if you want to customize their abilities, 
port customs clerk might have led a peaceful life un- you can choose the Adventurer class.



Character Classes •17 

Expert

Your hero is exceptionally good at a useful skill. Doc-
tors, cat burglars, starship pilots, grifters, technicians, Class Abilities
or any other concept that focuses on expertise in a Every Expert PC has certain special abilities.
non-combat skill should pick the Expert class. Experts 
are the best at such skills and gain more of them than •	 You gain a free level in a non-combat focus relat-
other classes do. ed to your background. Most concepts will take 

Just as a Warrior can be relied upon to make a Specialist in their main skill, though Diplomat, Star-

shot when the chips are down, an Expert has a knack farer, Healer, or some other focus might suit better. 
for succeeding at the moments of greatest importance. You may not take a combat-oriented focus with 
Once per scene, an Expert can reroll a failed skill check, this perk. In case of uncertainty, the GM decides 
taking the new result if it’s better. This benefit can be whether or not a focus is permitted.
applied to any skill check, even those that the Expert 
isn’t specially focused in. Their natural talent bleeds •	 Once per scene, you can reroll a failed skill check, 
over into everything they do. taking the new roll if it’s better.

In their chosen field, however, the Expert is excep-
tionally gifted. Aside from the free focus level that all •	 When you advance an experience level, you 
PCs get at the start of the game, an Expert can choose gain a bonus skill point that can be spent on any 
an additional level in a non-combat focus related to non-combat, non-psychic skill. You can save this 
their background. They can spend both of these levels point to spend later if you wish.
on the same focus if they wish, thus starting the game 
with level 2 in that particular knack.

Hit Points and Attack Bonus
To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6 and 
add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 1 hit 
point. Your attack bonus is equal to half your character 
level, rounded down, so it’s +0 at first level.

Psychic

Your hero has received training in controlling their nat-
ural Metadimensional Extroversion Syndrome, and can Class Abilities
wield the psychic powers that come from that strange Every Psychic PC has certain special abilities.
affliction. Controlling and developing psychic abilities 
is an extremely demanding process but allows for feats •	 Unlike Warriors or Experts, you are capable of 
wholly impossible to ordinary men and women. learning psychic disciplines and their associated 

Psychics are extremely rare in the general popula- techniques, as described starting on page 28. 
tion. Averages vary with worlds, but most range from 
one in ten thousand to one in a hundred thousand who •	 When you pick this class, choose any two psychic 
have the MES condition that make them amenable to skills as bonus skills. You can pick the same one 
psychic training. Some of these go their entire lives twice to obtain level-1 proficiency in it and a free 
without realizing their capabilities. Others end up ex- level-1 technique from that discipline.
ploiting their native abilities without training, almost 
inevitably ending up seriously brain-damaged or crazed •	 You have an Effort score, which can be used to 
by the effects of unmediated metadimensional energy. fuel psychic abilities. Your maximum Effort is 

Your hero has been fortunate enough to find a psy- equal to 1 plus your highest psychic skill plus the 
chic academy or other training institution capable of better of your Wisdom or Constitution modifi-
molding and directing these abilities. They may have ers. Even with a penalty, your maximum Effort 
come to this later in life, or been recruited young by a cannot be lower than 1.
society that carefully watches for MES symptoms.

Some societies deal with their psychics more gen-
erously than others. On some worlds, psychic powers Hit Points and Attack Bonus
are accepted and their possessors can look forward to To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6 and 
lucrative and respected employment. On others, fear of add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 1 hit 
these uncanny powers and memories of the horrors of point. Your attack bonus is equal to half your character 
the Scream lead to less welcoming treatment. level, rounded down, so it’s +0 at first level.



18• Character Classes

Warrior

Whether a hiveworld thug, barbarian lostworlder, 
gengineered combat hominid, or a natural-born kill- Class Abilities
er wasting their potential in a desk job, your hero has Every Warrior PC has certain special abilities.
a real talent for inflicting mayhem. Combat in Stars 

Without Number is extremely dangerous, but your hero •	 You gain a free level in a combat-related focus as-
has the talents to survive situations that would kill a sociated with your background. The GM decides 
less martial adventurer. if a focus qualifies if it’s an ambiguous case.

As a gifted purveyor of violence, you get to pick 
an extra combat-related focus associated with your •	 Warriors are lucky in combat. Once per scene, as 
special brand of havoc. While a character of any class an Instant ability, you can either choose to ne-
can take these special combat talents, you get this ad- gate a successful attack roll against you or turn a 
ditional pick and a better natural hit bonus than heroes missed attack roll you made into a successful hit. 
of other classes. You can use this ability after the dice are rolled, 

Most importantly, however, Warriors have an un- but it cannot be used against environmental dam-
canny gift for making a shot when a hit is desperately age, effects without an attack roll, or hits on a 
needed, or dodging a bullet when their life is on the vehicle you’re occupying.
line. Once per scene, a Warrior can either automati-
cally negate a successful combat hit they just received, •	 You gain two extra maximum hit points at each 
taking no damage from it, or else they can turn one character level.
of their own missed attack rolls into an automatic hit. 
This versatility makes Warriors exceptionally danger-
ous enemies in a one-on-one fight, and significantly Hit Points and Attack Bonus
more likely to survive the gory chaos of a general melee. To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6+2 

and add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 
1 hit point. Your attack bonus is equal to your character 
level so it is +1 at first level.

Adventurer

The Adventurer class is the catch-all for heroes who 
don’t fit so neatly into the other three categories. Per- Partial Psychic
haps your mercenary spent her girlhood at a psychic You are a restricted psychic. Pick one psychic discipline 
academy, or maybe your combat medic knows more as a bonus skill at level-0. You can improve this skill 
about using a laser rifle than most physicians do. You with foci or skill points gained from advancing a level, 
can use the Adventurer class to customize your hero’s but you cannot learn or improve any other psychic skill. 
abilities, trading focus for wider versatility. Your maximum Effort equals 1 plus this psychic skill’s 

Adventurers split their focus between different level plus the best of your Wisdom or Constitution 
spheres, gaining weaker versions of each class’ ben- modifiers, down to a minimum of 1.
efits. For example, an Adventurer who is a psionic 
warrior-adept might have considerable powers of Partial Warrior
telekinetic force and a brutal expertise at bare-handed You gain a free level in a combat focus related to your 
combat, but they won’t have access to the wider psionic background. Gain +1 to your attack bonus at first and 
potential of an unrestricted Psychic or the death-defy- fifth levels. Gain 2 extra maximum hit points each level. 
ing combat luck of a hardened Warrior. Thus, at first level, you’d roll 1d6+2 for your maximum 

To define your Adventurer’s abilities, pick two of hit points. At second, you’d roll 2d6+4, and so forth.
the following three partial classes.

Hit Points and Attack Bonus
Partial Expert To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6 and 
You gain a free level in a non-combat focus related to add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 1 hit 
your background. Most concepts will take Specialist, point. Adventurers who’ve taken the Partial Warrior 
though Diplomat, Starfarer, Healer, or some other focus option add 2 hit points to their maximum.
might suit better. Gain an extra skill point every time The base attack bonus for Adventurers is equal to 
you gain a character level which can be spent on any half their character level, rounded down, so +0 at first 
non-psychic, non-combat skill. level. If the PC has taken the Partial Warrior option 

their class bonus increases this to +1 at first level.



Foci •19 

Choosing a Focus

Every member of a class has certain baseline abilities 
that let them do well at their role. Warriors are always Origin Foci
good combatants, Experts are always gifted with their If you include aliens or robots in your campaign, you 
skills, and Psychics always have a few pertinent psionic can represent them with origin foci. Origin foci are 
abilities. Aside from these baseline abilities, characters taken the same way as any other foci, and may be pur-
also have a focus. chased with a beginning character’s focus level. 

A focus is an additional knack, perk, or aptitude If a GM is feeling generous, they can allow a PC 
that a hero has, one that grants them certain benefits to take a level in an origin focus as well as their usual 
in play. Each focus has one or more levels of increas- free focus level, in order to allow a hero to start as an 
ingly-strong effect. For example, someone with level alien with some additional knack. A PC who takes this 
1 in the Die Hard focus gains two extra maximum hit option doesn’t get their usual bonus focus at level 2; 
points each level and automatically stabilizes after a they’ve already spent it on being unusual.
mortal wound, while someone with level 2 can negate Origin foci for robotic VIs are on page 199. Avail-
the first injury they suffer each day that would inca- able alien races will vary with the campaign setting, but 
pacitate or kill them. The benefits of a focus stack, so details on making these race are on page 209.
if you take level 2 in one, you get all the benefits from 
level 1 as well.

Any character can pick any focus, and it doesn’t Choosing A Class and Focus
have to “match” the class you selected. A Psychic can Basil Hayes needs a class. While an obvious pick 
choose the Unarmed Combatant focus for fistic prow- would be Expert to match his background, Simon 
ess, while a Warrior might have enough experience decides it would be more amusing to make him a 
with battlefield trauma to qualify as a Healer. The only soldier; specifically, the sniper “Basilisk” Hayes, the 
obligation is that you explain how your hero picked dire-eyed wraith of the cold Karelian forest. Given 
up the training or exhibited their natural aptitude for the complete lack of a market for his PhD and his 
the focus. own natural poor judgment, Basil signed up with 

Many foci give a bonus level in a skill as part of a Karelian mercenary outfit. He’s just gotten out 
their level 1 benefits. These bonus levels work like any of his tour of duty, but at least now his skills are 
other skill pick; they either give you the skill at lev- significantly more marketable.
el-0, raise an existing level-0 skill to level-1, or let you While Simon could go with the Adventurer 
pick any other non-psychic skill if the skill is already class for Basil and make him a Partial Warrior/
at level-1. Partial Expert, he decides to make Basil a full-

Unless indicated otherwise a focus can be taken fledged Warrior. His intellectual talents can be 
only once. Once you’ve taken level 1 of Die Hard, you useful, but Basil’s main utility to the group is his 
can’t pick it again to get an additional two hit points per ability to deal with combat situations.
level. Some skill-oriented foci allow you to pick them Every PC gets to pick one focus of any kind, 
more than once to apply to different skills. and a Warrior gets to pick one combat-related 

Beginning PCs can pick one level of focus. PCs focus. Basil’s first choice is easy, as clearly he’s a 
with the Expert class or the Partial Expert Adventur- Sniper, so he writes that down as a level 1 focus. 
er class option can choose an additional level in any Rather than taking a second level in that with his 
non-combat focus related to their background, in- other pick, Simon decides to have Basil pick up 
cluding level 2 in their initial choice. Most will choose a level of the Gunslinger focus. Basil will get the 
Specialist, Healer, Diplomat, or some other similar focus, chance to pick more foci as he gains experience.
but the GM can allow other non-combat foci. PCs with Each of these foci grant a bonus level in Shoot, 
the Warrior class or the Partial Warrior Adventurer so they stack together to give the young sniper a 
class option can do the same in choosing an additional Shoot-1 skill. Basil’s now as deft with a rifle as he 
combat-related focus. is with 19th century Terran Victorian poetry.

As your hero advances in experience, you’ll get the Lastly, Basil gets to pick any single non-psy-
opportunity to pick up new foci or improve existing chic skill of his choice as a hobby or natural talent. 
ones as you refine your talents or learn new tricks. In He decides that a sniper isn’t much of a sniper 
some cases, you might work with the GM to come up without being hard to spot, so picks Sneak-0 as his 
with a custom focus reflecting your PC’s specific special skill. This free skill pick is often useful for filling in 
talent or a perk that makes sense given their recent the necessary talents of a concept that aren’t sup-
adventures. Foci are an important part of a hero’s char- plied by the Learning table or bonus skills granted 
acter, and they should always reflect something basic by a hero’s foci.
about how they tend to interact with the world.



20• Foci

The Focus List

Alert Authority
You are keenly aware of your surroundings and virtual- You have an uncanny kind of charisma about you, one 
ly impossible to take unaware. You have an instinctive that makes others instinctively follow your instructions 
alacrity of response that helps you act before less wary and further your causes. At level 1, this is a knack of 
persons can think to move. charm and personal magnetism, while level 2 might 
Level 1: Gain Notice as a bonus skill. You cannot be suggest latent telepathic influence or transhuman me-

surprised, nor can others use the Execution Attack metic hacking augmentations. Where this focus refers 
option on you. When you roll initiative, roll twice to followers, it means NPCs who have voluntarily cho-
and take the best result. sen to be in your service. PCs never count as followers.

Level 2: You always act first in a combat round unless Level 1: Gain Lead as a bonus skill. Once per day, you 
someone else involved is also this Alert. can make a request from an NPC who is not open-

ly hostile to you, rolling a Cha/Lead skill check at 
Armsman a difficulty of the NPC’s Morale score. If you suc-
You have an unusual competence with thrown weap- ceed, they will comply with the request, provided 
ons and melee attacks. This focus’ benefits do not apply it is not harmful or extremely uncharacteristic.
to unarmed attacks or projectile weapons. For thrown Level 2: Those who follow you are fired with confi-
weapons, you can’t use the benefits of the Armsman dence. Any NPC being directly led by you gains a 
focus at the same time as Gunslinger. Morale and hit roll bonus equal to your Lead skill 
Level 1: Gain Stab as a bonus skill. You can draw or and a +1 bonus on all skill checks. Your followers 

sheath a Stowed melee or thrown weapon as an will not act against your interests unless under 
Instant action. You may add your Stab skill level to extreme pressure.
a melee or thrown weapon’s damage roll or Shock 
damage, assuming it has any to begin with. Close Combatant

Level 2: Your primitive melee and thrown weapons You’ve had all too much practice at close-in fighting 
count as TL4 weapons for the purpose of over- and desperate struggles with pistol or blade. You’re ex-
coming advanced armors. Even on a miss with a tremely skilled at avoiding injury in melee combat, and 
melee weapon, you do an unmodified 1d4 damage at level 2 you can dodge through a melee scrum without 
to the target, plus any Shock damage. This bonus fear of being knifed in passing.
damage doesn’t apply to thrown weapons or at- Level 1: Gain any combat skill as a bonus skill. You can 
tacks that use the Punch skill. use pistol-sized ranged weapons in melee with-

out suffering penalties for the proximity of melee 
Assassin attackers. You ignore Shock damage from melee 
You are practiced at sudden murder, and have certain assailants, even if you’re unarmored at the time.
advantages in carrying out an Execution Attack as de- Level 2: The Shock damage from your melee attacks 
scribed in the rules on page 52. treats all targets as if they were AC 10. The Fight-

Level 1: Gain Sneak as a bonus skill. You can conceal an ing Withdrawal combat action is treated as an On 
object no larger than a knife or pistol from any- Turn action for you and can be performed freely.
thing less invasive than a strip search, including 
normal TL4 weapon detection devices. You can Connected
draw or produce this object as an On Turn action, You’re remarkably gifted at making friends and forging 
and your point-blank ranged attacks made from ties with the people around you. Wherever you go, you 
surprise with it cannot miss the target. always seem to know somebody useful to your ends.

Level 2: You can take a Move action on the same round Level 1: Gain Connect as a bonus skill. If you’ve spent 
as you make an Execution Attack, closing rapidly at least a week in a not-entirely-hostile location, 
with a target before you attack. You may split this you’ll have built a web of contacts willing to do 
Move action when making an Execution Attack, favors for you that are no more than mildly illegal. 
taking part of it before you murder your target You can call on one favor per game day and the 
and part of it afterwards. This movement happens GM decides how far they’ll go for you.
too quickly to alert a victim or to be hindered by Level 2: Once per game session, if it’s not entirely im-
bodyguards, barring an actual physical wall of plausible, you meet someone you know who is 
meat between you and your prey. willing to do modest favors for you. You can de-

cide when and where you want to meet this per-
son, but the GM decides who they are and what 
they can do for you.



Foci •21 

Die Hard	 Healer
You are surprisingly hard to kill. You can survive inju- Healing comes naturally to you, and you’re particularly 
ries or bear up under stresses that would incapacitate a gifted at preventing the quick bleed-out of wounded 
less determined hero. allies and comrades.
Level 1: You gain an extra 2 maximum hit points per Level 1: Gain Heal as a bonus skill. You may attempt to 

level. This bonus applies retroactively if you take stabilize one mortally-wounded adjacent person 
this focus after first level. You automatically stabi- per round as an On Turn action. When rolling 
lize if mortally wounded by anything smaller than Heal skill checks, roll 3d6 and drop the lowest die.
a Heavy weapon. Level 2: Stims or other technological healing devices 

Level 2: The first time each day that you are reduced to applied by you heal twice as many hit points as 
zero hit points by an injury, you instead survive normal. Using only basic medical supplies, you 
with one hit point remaining. This ability can’t can heal 1d6+Heal skill hit points of damage to 
save you from Heavy weapons or similar trauma. every injured or wounded person in your group 

with ten minutes of first aid spread among them. 
Diplomat Such healing can be applied to a given target only 
You know how to get your way in personal negotia- once per day.
tions, and can manipulate the attitudes of those around 
you. Even so, while smooth words are versatile, they’ll Henchkeeper
only work if your interlocutor is actually willing to You have an distinct knack for picking up lost souls 
listen to you. who willingly do your bidding. You might induce them 
Level 1: Gain Talk as a bonus skill. You speak all the lan- with promises of money, power, excitement, sex, or 

guages common to the sector and can learn new some other prize that you may or may not eventually 
ones to a workable level in a week, becoming flu- grant. A henchman obtained with this focus will serve 
ent in a month. Reroll 1s on any skill check dice in loyal fashion until clearly betrayed or placed in unac-
related to negotiation or diplomacy. ceptable danger. Henchmen are not “important” people 

Level 2: Once per game session, shift an intelligent in their society, and are usually marginal sorts, outcasts, 
NPC’s reaction roll one step closer to friendly if the desperate, or other persons with few options.
you can talk to them for at least thirty seconds. You can use more conventional pay or induce-

ments to acquire additional henchmen, but these extra 
Gunslinger hirelings are no more loyal or competent than your pay 
You have a gift with a gun. While this talent most com- and treatment can purchase.
monly applies to slugthrowers or energy weapons, it Level 1: Gain Lead as a bonus skill. You can acquire 
is also applicable to thrown weapons, bows, or other henchmen within 24 hours of arriving in a com-
ranged weapons that can be used with the Shoot skill. munity, assuming anyone is suitable hench mate-
For thrown weapons, you can’t use the benefits of the rial. These henchmen will not fight except to save 
Armsman focus at the same time as Gunslinger. their own lives, but will escort you on adventures 
Level 1: Gain Shoot as a bonus skill. You can draw or and risk great danger to help you. Most hench-

holster a Stowed ranged weapon as an On Turn men will be treated as Peaceful Humans from the 
action. You may add your Shoot skill level to a Xenobestiary section of the book. You can have 
ranged weapon’s damage roll. one henchmen at a time for every three charac-

Level 2: Once per round, you can reload a ranged weap- ter levels you have, rounded up. You can release 
on as an On Turn action if it takes no more than henchmen with no hard feelings at any plausible 
one round to reload. Even on a miss with a Shoot time and pick them back up later should you be 
attack, you do an unmodified 1d4 damage. without a current henchman.

Level 2: Your henchmen are remarkably loyal and 
Hacker determined, and will fight for you against any-
You have a considerable fluency with digital security thing but clearly overwhelming odds. Whether 
measures and standard encryption methods. You know through natural competence or their devotion 
how to make computerized systems obey you until to you, they’re treated as Martial Humans from 
their automatic failsafes come down on your control. the Xenobestiary section. You can make faithful 
Level 1: Gain Program as a bonus skill. When attempt- henchmen out of skilled and highly-capable NPCs, 

ing to hack a database or computerized system, but this requires that you actually have done them 
roll 3d6 on the skill check and drop the lowest die. some favor or help that would reasonably earn 

Level 2: Your hack duration increases to 1d4+Program such fierce loyalty.
skill x 10 minutes. You have an instinctive under-
standing of the tech; you never need to learn the 
data protocols for a strange system and are always 
treated as familiar with it.



22• Foci

Ironhide Sniper
Whether through uncanny reflexes, remarkable luck, You are an expert at placing a bullet or beam on an 
gengineered skin fibers, or subtle telekinetic shielding, unsuspecting target. These special benefits only apply 
you have natural defenses equivalent to high-quality when making an Execution Attack with a firearm or 
combat armor. The benefits of this focus don’t stack bow, as described on page 52.
with armor, though Dexterity or shield modifiers apply. Level 1: Gain Shoot as a bonus skill. When making 
Level 1: You have an innate Armor Class of 15 plus half a skill check for an Execution Attack or target 

your character level, rounded up. shooting, roll 3d6 and drop the lowest die.
Level 2: Your abilities are so effective that they render Level 2: A target hit by your Execution Attack takes a 

you immune to unarmed attacks or primitive -4 penalty on the Physical saving throw to avoid 
weaponry as if you wore powered armor. immediate mortal injury. Even if the save is suc-

cessful, the target takes double the normal damage 
Psychic Training inflicted by the attack.
You’ve had special training in a particular psychic disci-
pline. You must be a Psychic or have taken the Partial Specialist
Psychic class option as an Adventurer to pick this focus. You are remarkably talented at a particular skill. Wheth-
In the latter case, you can only take training in the dis- er a marvelous cat burglar, a world-famous athlete, a 
cipline you initially chose as a Partial Psychic. As with brilliant engineer, or some other savant, your expertise 
most foci, this focus can be taken only once. is extremely reliable. You may take this focus more than 
Level 1: Gain any psychic skill as a bonus. If this im- once for different skills.

proves it to level-1 proficiency, choose a free lev- Level 1: Gain a non-combat, non-psychic skill as a bonus. 
el-1 technique from that discipline. Your maxi- Roll 3d6 and drop the lowest die for all skill checks 
mum Effort increases by one. in this skill.

Level 2: When you advance a level, the bonus psychic Level 2: Roll 4d6 and drop the two lowest dice for all 
skill you chose for the first level of the focus auto- skill checks in this skill.
matically gets one skill point put toward increas-
ing it or purchasing a technique from it. You may Star Captain
save these points for later, if more are required to You have a tremendous natural talent for ship combat, 
raise the skill or buy a particular technique. These and can make any starship you captain a significantly 
points are awarded retroactively if you take this more fearsome opponent. You must take the captain’s 
focus level later in the game. role during a fight as described on page 117 of the Ship 

Combat rules in order to benefit from this focus.
Savage Fray Level 1: Gain Lead as a bonus skill. Your ship gains 2 
You are a whirlwind of bloody havoc in melee combat, extra Command Points at the start of each turn.
and can survive being surrounded far better than most Level 2: A ship you captain gains bonus hit points equal 
combatants. to 20% of its maximum at the start of each com-
Level 1: Gain Stab as a bonus skill. All enemies adjacent bat. Damage is taken from these bonus points first, 

to you at the end of your turn whom you have not and they vanish at the end of the fight and do not 
attacked suffer the Shock damage of your weapon require repairs to replenish before the next. In ad-
if their Armor Class is not too high to be affected. dition, once per engagement, you may resolve a 

Level 2: After suffering your first melee hit in a round, Crisis as an Instant action by explaining how your 
any further melee attacks from other assailants au- leadership resolves the problem.
tomatically miss you. If the attacker who hits you 
has multiple attacks, they may attempt all of them, Starfarer
but other foes around you simply miss. You are an expert in the plotting and execution of inter-

stellar spike drills. While most experienced pilots can 
Shocking Assault manage conventional drills along well-charted spike 
You’re extremely dangerous to enemies around you. routes, you have the knack for forging new drill paths 
The ferocity of your melee attacks stresses and distracts and cutting courses too dangerous for lesser navigators.
enemies even when your blows don’t draw blood. Level 1: Gain Pilot as a bonus skill. You automatically 
Level 1: Gain Punch or Stab as a bonus skill. The Shock succeed at all spike drill-related skill checks of dif-

damage of your weapon treats all targets as if they ficulty 10 or less.
were AC 10, assuming your weapon is capable of Level 2: Double your Pilot skill for all spike drill-relat-
harming the target in the first place. ed skill checks. Spike drives of ships you navigate 

Level 2: In addition, you gain a +2 bonus to the Shock are treated as one level higher; thus, a drive-1 is 
damage rating of all melee weapons and unarmed treated as a drive-2, up to a maximum of drive-7. 
attacks. Regular hits never do less damage than Spike drills you personally oversee take only half 
this Shock would do on a miss. the time they would otherwise require.



Foci •23 

Tinker Wanderer
You have a natural knack for modifying and improving Your hero gets around. As part of a life on the road, 
equipment, as given in the rules on page 100. they’ve mastered a number of tricks for ensuring their 
Level 1: Gain Fix as a bonus skill. Your Maintenance mobility and surviving the inevitable difficulties of a 

score is doubled, allowing you to maintain twice vagabond existence.
as many mods. Both ship and gear mods cost only Level 1: Gain Survive as a bonus skill. You can convey 
half their usual price in credits, though pretech basic ideas in all the common languages of the 
salvage requirements remain the same. sector. You can always find free transport to a de-

Level 2: Your Fix skill is treated as one level higher for sired destination for yourself and a small group of 
purposes of building and maintaining mods and your friends provided any traffic goes to the place. 
calculating your Maintenance score. Advanced Finding this transport takes no more than an hour, 
mods require one fewer pretech salvage part to but it may not be a strictly legitimate means of 
make, down to a minimum of zero. travel and may require working passage.

Level 2: You can forge, scrounge, or snag travel papers 
Unarmed Combatant and identification for the party with 1d6 hours 
Your empty hands are more dangerous than knives of work. These papers and permits will stand up 
and guns in the grip of the less gifted. Your unarmed to ordinary scrutiny, but require an opposed Int/
attacks are counted as melee weapons when it comes to Administer versus Wis/Notice check if examined 
binding up opponents wielding rifles and similar long by an official while the PC is actually wanted by 
arms, though you need at least one hand free to do so. the state for some crime. When finding transport 
Level 1: Gain Punch as a bonus skill. Your unarmed for the party, the transportation always makes the 

attacks become more dangerous as your Punch trip at least as fast as a dedicated charter would.
skill increases. At level-0, they do 1d6 damage. At 
level-1, they do 1d8 damage. At level-2 they do Wild Psychic Talent
1d10, level-3 does 1d12, and level-4 does 1d12+1. Some men and women are born with a very limited 
At Punch-1 or better, they have the Shock quality form of MES, the mental condition that allows for the 
equal to your Punch skill against AC 15 or less. use of psychic powers. While these people are not true 
While you normally add your Punch skill level to psychics, these “wild talents” can create one limited psy-
any unarmed damage, don’t add it twice to this chic effect. Training is not always required to develop 
Shock damage. this ability, and their MES is so mild that they don’t 

Level 2: You know locks and twists that use powered suffer the risk of madness or brain damage that more 
servos against their wearer. Your unarmed attacks developed psychics risk should they use their powers 
count as TL4 weapons for the purpose of over- without proper training.
coming advanced armors. Even on a miss with a Wild talents are not treated as psychics for gen-
Punch attack, you do an unmodified 1d6 damage. eral purposes and cannot “torch” their powers. When 

relevant, they are treated as having one point of Effort. 
Unique Gift Psychics and Partial Psychics cannot take this focus.
Whether due to exotic technological augmentation, a Level 1: Pick a psychic discipline. You gain an ability 
unique transhuman background, or a remarkable hu- equivalent to the level-0 core power of that disci-
man talent, you have the ability to do something that’s pline. Optionally, you may instead pick a level-1 
simply impossible for a normal human. technique from that discipline, but that tech-

This is a special focus which serves as a catch-all nique must stand alone; you can’t pick one that 
for some novel power or background perk that doesn’t augments another technique or core ability. For 
have a convenient fit in the existing rules. A transhu- example, you could pick the Telekinetic Armory 

man who can function normally in lethal environments, technique from Telekinesis, because that ability 
a nanotech-laden experimental subject with a head full does not require the use of any other Telekine-
of exotic sensors, or a brilliant gravitic scientist who sis power. You could not pick the Mastered Succor 

can fly thanks to their personal tech might all take this ability from Biopsionics, because that technique is 
focus to cover their special abilities. meant to augment another power you don’t have.

It’s up to the GM to decide what’s reasonable and Level 2: You now have a maximum Effort of two points. 
fair to be covered under this gift. If an ability is particu- You may pick a second ability according to the 
larly powerful, it might require the user to take System guidelines above. This second does not need to be 
Strain to use it, as described on page 32. a stand-alone technique if it augments the power 

As a general rule this ability should be better than you chose for level 1 of this focus. Thus, if your 
a piece of gear the PC could buy for credits. The player first pick was gaining the level-0 power of Psychic 

is spending a very limited resource when they make Succor, your second could be Mastered Succor. You 
this focus pick, so what they get should be good enough still could not get the level-1 core power of Psychic 

that they can’t just duplicate it with a fat bank account. Succor, however, as you’re still restricted to level-0.



24• Final Touches

Final Touches

You’re almost finished. Just a few more things to note 
down, and you’ll have an adventurer ready for play.

First, pick one more non-psychic skill of your 
choice. This pick represents your hobbies, your side 
interests, or some well of natural talent. You gain it at 
level-0 if you don’t already have it. Otherwise, it stacks 
to increase the skill to level-1. You can’t pick a skill you 
already have at level-1.

Next, determine your maximum hit points. Your 
hit points are a measure of how close you are to death 
or defeat; when you run out of them, your character is 
dead or unable to continue fighting. You can regain lost 
hit points by rest and biopsionic healing, but they can-
not exceed their maximum. Your maximum hit points 
are equal to 1d6 plus your Constitution modifier, down 
to a minimum of 1 hit point. Warriors and Adventur-
ers with the Partial Warrior class option can add a +2 
bonus to this total.

Now note down your base attack bonus. For most 
PCs, this is equal to half your character level, rounded 
down, so it’s +0 for most characters. If your hero is a 
Warrior or an Adventurer with the Partial Warrior 
class option, your beginning base attack bonus is +1.

Record your Physical, Mental, and Evasion saving 

throws. Your Physical saving throw is 15 minus the 
better of your Strength or Constitution attribute mod-
ifiers. Your Mental saving throw is 15 minus the better 
of your Wisdom or Charisma attribute modifiers. Your 
Evasion saving throw is 15 minus the better of your 
Dexterity or Intelligence attribute modifiers. If you 
have a penalty in both modifiers, it’s possible to have a 
saving throw of 16 or more.

Lastly, either choose an equipment package from 
the list on the opposite page or roll 2d6 x 100 to find out 
how many credits you have to buy your beginning gear.

PCs and Languages

The standard language of the late Terran Mandate 
was a highly hybridized version of English. All PCs 
are assumed to speak “Mandate” unless they’ve got 
a very good reason not to, and will rapidly pick up 
enough to get by otherwise.

PCs also speak all the languages appropri-
ate to their background and history. A native 
of a French-speaking world will naturally speak 
French, or whatever French is in 3200 AD.

Linguist PCs with the Know skill know addi-
tional languages; one more at level-0, three more 
at level-1, six more at level-2, ten more at level-3, 
and all sector-known languages at level-4. PCs 
who are far-traveled or versed in dealing with 
other cultures may substitute Connect instead of 
Know to determine their bonus languages.



Final Touches •25 

Gunslinger

Equipment Packages Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 8 type A Cells
Armored Undersuit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0)

Rather than choosing gear from the Equipment chap-
ter, you can just take a premade package from this page Monoblade Knife (1d6 damage) Compad
instead of taking your starting credits. 100 credits

Once you’ve chosen your equipment, make sure to 
note down the damage and hit bonus of your weapons, 
and the Armor Class of any armor you have.

For weapons, your hit bonus is your base attack 
bonus plus your applicable skill, plus the attribute mod- Soldier

ifier used by the weapon. For ranged weapons, this Combat Rifle (1d12 damage) 80 rounds ammo
is usually Dexterity, while most melee weapons are Woven Body Armor (AC 15) Backpack (TL0)
Strength or Dexterity. Ranged energy weapons add +1 
to this, as they lack recoil or windage. Damage is equal Knife (1d4 damage) Compad
to the weapon’s damage die plus the attribute modifier. 100 credits

For armor, your total Armor Class is that of your 
armor plus your Dexterity modifier. Multiple suits of 
armor do not stack together.

Barbarian Scout

Spear (1d6+1 damage) Backpack (TL0) Laser Rifle (1d10 damage) 8 type A cells
Primitive hide armor (AC 13) 7 days rations Armored vacc suit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0)
Primitive shield (+1 AC) 20m rope Knife (1d4 damage) Compad
Knife (1d4 damage) 500 credits Survey scanner 25 credits

Survival kit
Binoculars (TL 3)

Blade Medic

Monoblade sword (1d8+1 dmg) Backpack (TL0) Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) Backpack (TL0)
Woven Body Armor (AC 15) Compad Secure Clothing (AC 13) Medkit
Secure Clothing (AC 13) Lazarus patch 4 Lazarus patches Compad
Thermal knife (1d6 damage) 50 credits 2 doses of Lift Bioscanner

25 credits

Thief Civilian

Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 2 type A cells Secure Clothing (AC 13) Compad
Armored Undersuit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0) 700 credits
Monoblade knife (1d6 damage) Compad
Climbing harness Metatool
Low-light goggles 25 credits

Hacker Technician

Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 2 type A cells Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 4 type A cells
Secure Clothing (AC 13) Dataslab Armored Undersuit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0)
Postech toolkit Metatool Monoblade knife (1d6 damage) Dataslab
3 units of spare parts 2 line shunts Postech toolkit Metatool

100 credits 6 units of spare parts 200 credits



26• Quick Character Creation

Quick Character Creation

If you don’t have the time or inclination to do things The first step is to roll on the class table below. This will 
the leisurely way, you can use these pages to quickly give you your class, your attributes, the hit point die to 
roll up a hero. You can either pick or roll from any of roll, and your attack bonus. Each class “style” hints at 
the tables to get a character that suits. the kind of PC those attributes might describe.

d8 Class and Style Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha HP Atk. Bon.

1 Expert (Smart) 10 (+0) 12 (+0) 11 (+0) 14 (+1) 7 (-1) 9 (+0) 1d6 +0
2 Expert (Smooth) 7 (-1) 9 (+0) 10 (+0) 12 (+0) 11 (+0) 14 (+1) 1d6 +0
3 Expert (Nimble) 10 (+0) 14 (+1) 12 (+0) 11 (+0) 9 (+0) 7 (-1) 1d6 +0
4 Warrior (Melee) 14 (+1) 9 (+0) 12 (+0) 7 (-1) 10 (+0) 11 (+0) 1d6+2 +1
5 Warrior (Ranged) 9 (+0) 14 (+1) 12 (+0) 10 (+0) 7 (-1) 11 (+0) 1d6+2 +1
6 Warrior (Leader) 7 (-1) 10 (+0) 9 (+0) 11 (+0) 12 (+0) 14 (+1) 1d6+2 +1
7 Psychic (Seer) 9 (+0) 11 (+0) 12 (+0) 10 (+0) 14 (+1) 7 (-1) 1d6 +0
8 Psychic (Adept) 12 (+0) 10 (+0) 14 (+1) 9 (+0) 11 (+0) 7 (-1) 1d6+1 +0

d20 Background Skills
Next, it’s time to pick or roll from the background table 

1 Barbarian Survive-0, Notice-0, Any Combat-0
to the right. Don’t worry if it doesn’t seem to fit your 
class; if your Melee Warrior happens to roll a past as 2 Clergy Talk-0, Perform-0, Know-0

a Scholar, just take a moment to decide why it is that 3 Courtesan Perform-0, Notice-0, Connect-0

an erudite scientist might also have a savage left hook. 4 Criminal Connect-0, Sneak-0, Talk-0
You can switch around your attributes if you want to 5 Dilettante Connect-0. Know-0, Talk-0
make things fit more closely, such as swapping your 

6 Entertainer Perform-0, Talk-0, Connect-0
Intelligence and Charisma in the case above.

7 Merchant Trade-0, Talk-0, Connect-0
The background options are general concepts as 

described starting on page 10. Your hero might be 8 Noble Lead-0, Connect-0, Administer-0

a model example of their type, or you might shuffle 9 Official Administer-0, Talk-0, Connect-0

around their details a little, deciding your Ranged War- 10 Peasant Exert-0, Sneak-0, Survive-0
rior Official is an ex-cop bounced out of the force after 11 Physician Heal-0, Know-0, Notice-0
investigating an alien smuggling ring a little too closely.

12 Pilot Pilot-0, Fix-0, Shoot or Trade-0
Once you’ve rolled or chosen your background, 

13 Politician Talk-0, Lead-0, Connect-0
note down the three skills listed with it. If one of the 
skills says “Any Combat”, choose either Punch, Shoot, 14 Scholar Know-0, Administer-0, Connect-0

or Stab depending on what fits best for your hero. 15 Soldier Any Combat-0, Exert-0, Survive-0

You’ll want to decide on your homeworld at this 16 Spacer Fix-0, Pilot-0, Program-0
point too. If you’re not familiar with the campaign 17 Technician Fix-0, Notice-0, Exert-0
setting, describe your hero’s background and ask the 

18 Thug Any Combat-0, Talk-0, Connect-0
GM which planet they’re most likely from. The GM 

19 Vagabond Notice-0, Sneak-0, Survive-0
can then fill you in on any important cultural or social 
details that might’ve influenced your hero’s history. 20 Worker Connect-0, Exert-0, Work-0

If you picked or rolled the Psychic class, roll twice on d6 Psychic Skill

the table to the left to find out what psychic disciplines 1 Biopsionics-0, the art of healing and metamorphosis

you’ve trained to level-0. If you roll or pick the same 2 Metapsionics-0, the art of manipulating psychic power
one twice, it’s level-1, and you should pick a free level-1 3 Precognition-0, the art of sensing the future
technique from the Psionics chapter on page 28. 4 Telekinesis-0, the art of controlling kinetic energy

Take a minute to decide where you were trained 
5 Telepathy-0, the art of reading and influencing thought

to safely use your innate powers. If you’re not sure, ask 
the GM which psychic academy makes the most sense. 6 Teleportation-0, the art of instant translocation



Quick Character Creation •27 

Now roll 1d6 or pick from the table below to get ap- level-0. If you have it at level-0, it becomes level-1. And 
propriate foci for your hero, assuming you’d rather not if you already have it at level-1, pick any other non-psy-
pick freely. All the foci listed below are gained at level 1 chic skill instead that isn’t already level-1.
proficiency and are described starting on page 20. Psy- The focus you pick or roll tells you a lot about your 
chics can pick one focus. The other classes get one free hero’s past. A smooth Expert who’s a Connected Dip-
pick, plus one more combat focus for Warriors and one lomat might have been an underworld fixer, while a 
more non-combat focus for Experts. Healer with Specialization in Talk could have been a 

When you choose a focus, you might get a bonus psychiatrist or therapist. Take a moment to figure out 
skill from it. If you don’t have that skill, you gain it at how your hero’s foci reflect their past experience.

Class 1 2 3 4 5 6

Expert (Smart) Specialist/Fix Hacker Specialist/Know Specialist/Fix Healer Specialist/Fix
Die Hard Tinker Healer Tinker Ironhide Hacker

Expert (Smooth) Diplomat Specialist/Talk Diplomat Specialist/Lead Healer Specialist/Notice
Connected Die Hard Alert Authority Specialist/Talk Specialist/Talk

Expert (Nimble) Specialist/Pilot Healer Tinker Specialist/Sneak Specialist/Sneak Specialist/Entertain
Starfarer Die Hard Gunslinger Assassin Specialist/Exert Specialist/Sneak

Warrior (Melee) Savage Fray Assassin Armsman Close Combatant Ironhide Unarmed Combatant
Shocking Assault Specialist/Sneak Close Combatant Savage Fray Die Hard Close Combatant

Warrior (Ranged) Gunslinger Sniper Assassin Ironhide Gunslinger Close Combat
Close Combatant Specialist/Sneak Specialist/Sneak Die Hard Tinker Alert

Warrior (Leader) Gunslinger Ironhide Armsman Gunslinger Assassin Close Combatant
Authority Connected Specialist/Lead Specialist/Talk Die Hard Henchkeeper

Psychic (Seer) Alert Healer Specialist/Notice Psychic Training Savage Fray Hacker

Psychic (Adept) Armsman Ironhide Die Hard Psychic Training Healer Unarmed Combatant

Now it’s time for a few final touches. d20 Bonus Skill
Pick or roll a bonus skill. You can use the table to 

1 Administer: bureaucracy and management
the right or just choose any non-psychic skill to add at 
level-0 to your hero. You can pick a skill you already 2 Connect: knowing people and cultures
have at level-0 to make it level-1 instead. 3 Exert: climbing, running, throwing, and such

If you’re playing a Psychic, note down your begin- 4 Fix: repairing and building things
ning maximum Effort, which is equal to 1 plus your 
highest psychic skill plus the better of your Wisdom 5 Heal: curing harm in mind and body

or Constitution modifiers. 6 Know: scientific and academic knowledge
Write down your saving throws. Your Physi- 7 Lead: persuade others to do as you are doing

cal saving throw is equal to 15 minus your Strength 
8 Notice: spot things and detect the unusual

or Constitution modifiers, whichever is better. Your 
Evasion saving throw is equal to 15 minus the better 9 Perform: sing, dance, act, and the like
of your Dexterity or Intelligence modifiers, and your 10 Pilot: fly ships, ride beasts, sail boats
Mental saving throw is 15 minus the better of your 11 Program: hack computers, run comms
Wisdom or Charisma modifiers.

Pick your starting equipment, either rolling 2d6 12 Punch: fight unarmed
x 100 to find your beginning credit total or picking a 13 Shoot: fight at range
package from page 25. Note down your beginning hit 14 Sneak: defeat security and avoid notice
bonus totals and damage for any weapons you have, 

15 Stab: fight with melee weapons
and the Armor Class total for any armor you wear.

Finally, put a name on this budding hero and 16 Survive: avoid natural peril, find food
choose their initial goal. What are they trying to ac- 17 Talk: persuade others to believe things
complish right now? Get rich? Get off their tedious 18 Trade: buy, sell, and find vendors of things
homeworld? Take revenge on a local tyrant? Whatever 
you pick should be something that motivates your hero 19 Work: a job or talent not covered above
from the very start, and it should also be something that 20 Change a level-0 skill you have to level-1
complements the interests of the rest of the players. 
Nobody’s going to thank you if you roll up a PC that 
none of the other party members would want to asso-
ciate with, or one that can’t be expected to play nicely 
with the rest of the group. 






PSIONICS
Psionic powers first manifested centuries ago in the women of some worlds now fear psychics, not only for 
wake of the first interstellar flights. Later paraphysi- the ancestral memory of the Scream and the chaos that 
cists speculated that something about the exposure to followed, but also because their only experience with 
metadimensional energies incurred in spike drive trav- these unfortunates has been one of uncontrolled power, 
el changed these spacers, altering genomes or warping madness, and death.
their energy shadows in a way that changed their even- In the past few centuries, however, a few worlds 
tual offspring. While this theory was never completely have managed to resuscitate the ancient psychic proto-
proven, it was demonstrated that psionic powers were cols and develop metapsionic tutors skilled enough to 
far more prevalent on the frontier, in people who were train new psychics. For some, it was the fruit of some 
descended of starfaring ancestors, than they were on discovered pretech wonder that damped psychic ener-
Old Terra. On most frontier worlds about one in ten gies enough to safely experiment. For others, it was the 
thousand children are born with psychic aptitude, product of coldly ruthless experimentation on dispos-
while Old Terra displayed only a tenth of that incidence. able psychic test victims. A few worlds even retained 

Psychic abilities initially seemed to be a congenital some shreds of psychic mastery from the ancient days, 
curse, one known as “Metadimensional Extroversion the result of a Scream victim who was lucid enough 
Syndrome”, or MES. Children manifested MES in pu- to teach pupils, though usually for some demented or 
berty or early adulthood, after certain critical stages of horrible end. Whatever the source, these institutions 
brain development opened a channel between their provide desperately-desired training for those few af-
minds and the churning maelstrom of energies that flicted with MES.
boiled in metadimensional space. By a conscious or un- These “psychic academies” are scattered widely 
conscious act of will, they could release these energies throughout the sectors of space, usually based out of 
in various forms. Even so, the passage of unmediated some amenable planetary polity or defensible deep-
metadimensional force through unprotected neural tis- space habitat. Some academies are exclusively for the 
sue almost invariably caused brain damage. Repeated use of a particular nation or planet, while others will 
use of these abilities caused crippling disability, death, accept anyone who can pay the tuition or satisfy the 
or madness. Most psychics were dead within a few interests of their patrons. Most are powerful players in 
years after manifesting. A few were able to control their the local political scene, offering services that mean life 
powers sufficiently to prevent accidental discharges, and death to MES sufferers and producing graduates 
but safe, controlled use of these abilities was unknown. who are extremely useful to local rulers. Others need 

In response, the Terran Mandate initiated the to operate in secret, avoiding the fearful attention of 
Psionic Authority, basing it on a terraformed Mars. populations that neither accept nor trust their powers.
Children from throughout Mandate space were care-
fully selected by the Authority and brought to the in- Psychic Characters and Training
stitute in order to study and hopefully cure this tragic All Psychic PCs are assumed to have had some sort of 
condition. Persistent legends speak of horrible exper- training. They may have received their education at a 
iments and ruthless sacrifices of “test subjects”, but no world-famous psychic academy on their homeworld, or 
proof of such evil ever emerged, and after decades of been taught in secret by a peripatetic psychic mentor, 
study, the Psionic Authority was actually able to pro- but only one in a million psychics has the blind luck and 
duce protocols that allowed controlled, safe employ- natural aptitude to develop an intuitive control of their 
ment of psionic powers. MES. Of course, it may be that your PC was that one 

The bloom of psitech development that followed in a million, but you’ll want to discuss it with your GM.
and the wonders of jump gates and the Second Wave Psychic training requires from one to four years 
of human expansion are a matter of history. So too is to complete, depending on the aptitude of the pupil 
the Scream that erupted six centuries ago and granted and the amount of training support they get from oth-
every living psychic in human space either violent mad- er psychics. Most academies have one or more “deans” 
ness or instant death. The interstellar societal collapse who actually have the metapsionic abilities to dampen 
that followed and the centuries-long Silence between and buffer novice minds. Regular application of their 
the stars has been a matter of living memory for many abilities to the pupils allows the students to safely prac-
ill-connected frontier worlds. tice and train with their powers until they’ve mastered 

With the Scream and the death or madness of ev- the channeling of the energies. Aside from these deans, 
ery potential psychic tutor, psionics became the hor- additional psychic tutors can speed the learning process 
ror it once was generations ago. Untrained psychics by demonstrations, technical critique, and “encourage-
suffer under the lash of their own abilities, doomed to ment” of various kinds.
early death if they aren’t fortunate enough to fumble On worlds where psionics are outlawed or feared, 
into a means of damping their own powers. Men and most MES sufferers learn to either conceal their pow-



30• Psionics

ers or accept swift euthanasia or exile from a society Psionic Powers and Techniques
that dreads their abilities. Most are unable to do this; Every psychic who obtains level-0 proficiency in a dis-
their innate abilities boil out at some inopportune time, cipline gains access to its core technique. This technique 
and their true nature is revealed to their grieving family varies depending on the discipline, whether it’s physical 
and neighbors. Those who do learn to contain their translocation with Teleportation or tissue repair with 
abilities can go their whole lives unsuspected. A few Biopsionics. The strength of the ability varies with the 
receive secret teachings from wandering adepts, ones practitioner’s skill level; the Psychic Succor provided by 
who can quickly show them how to suppress their a biopsionicist with level-0 proficiency is much weaker 
powers. The best and most promising might be taken than that provided by someone with level-4 expertise. 
as full students by these adepts, shown how to master Core techniques improve naturally as the psychic im-
their own abilities and eventually teach others as well. proves their skill level. They do not need to be pur-

On planets where psionic powers are less terrify- chased with skill points or otherwise specially trained.
ing there is always at least one psychic academy in the As a psychic improves their skill level in a disci-
solar system that invites pupils. Some charge exorbitant pline, they may also learn other techniques, special 
tuition, but most are supported by governments, pri- tricks and abilities they’ve refined through practice. 
vate organizations, or successful graduates. Students Each time they improve a skill level, they can pick a 
are expected to pay for their training one way or an- new technique from that discipline. Most techniques 
other, however; if not in credits, then in service to the have a minimum skill level associated with them, and 
patron on completion of the training. Many psychics the PC can’t pick a technique which requires a high-
with decidedly non-academic Backgrounds acquired er skill level than they’ve mastered. They also cannot 
their experience in the mandatory service period af- “save” technique picks for later, either. They must be 
ter their graduation. Most psychic PCs will have left chosen immediately after improving the skill.
such duties behind by the time they start adventuring, The techniques listed under the disciplines here 
though a few of them may have departed considerably are commonly-known arts that are part of the basic 
in advance of their expected release date. curriculum of most competent psychic academies. No 

special training is required to choose them when a PC 
Psionic Skills is able to pick a new technique, as the principles were 
Psionic powers are divided up into disciplines, each of taught as part of their basic education. Other tech-
which has a corresponding skill. Someone with a basic, niques exist that are more esoteric in nature, and may 
functioning expertise in the skill has level-0, while a require a trainer to educate the PC in their principles 
true master of the art would have level-4. Only psychics before they can be learned.
can learn psionic skills, and they are most often taught Even so, some of the standard techniques might 
at rigidly-disciplined psychic academies. Attempting to be selectively restricted by an academy, taught only to 
develop these skills without such formalized training certain pupils. In some cases, this may be due to a spon-
is almost invariably lethal to the experimenter, though sor’s restrictions on what kind of abilities they want the 
an exceedingly few natural prodigies sometimes intui- local psychics to possess, while other academies might 
tively grasp their principles. Even fewer of these gifted consider them fundamentally immoral abilities. Con-
naturals are able to express their understanding in a trol over the metapsionic technique of psychic tutoring 
coherent, teachable form. is particularly strict, as any pupil who has its rudiments 

Some psychics are “unrestricted”. While they usu- included in their curriculum may eventually be able 
ally have a distinct aptitude for one or two disciplines, to train other psychics in turn. A PC may have to go 
they can theoretically learn any of them, and may raise to significant lengths in order to patch the holes in a 
any psionic skill they choose. Any character with the government-controlled psychic curriculum.
Psychic class is an unrestricted psychic. Others demon- PCs who want to learn additional techniques be-
strate gifts in only one discipline. While they can even- yond those acquired by improving their skills may buy 
tually master all aspects of that power, they can’t raise them separately with skill points, paying one point per 
any other psychic skill. Adventurers with the Partial level of the technique. PCs who want to retrain tech-
Psychic class option are such “restricted” psychics. niques may do so at the GM’s discretion, usually only 

Attempting to wield a natural psionic aptitude when they encounter some new esoteric technique 
without proper precautions will almost inevitably they’d like to learn in place of an existing art. Tech-
cause death or madness, as the uncontrolled cascade of niques can only be retrained into others of equal or 
MES energies will cause varying forms of permanent lower required skill level.
brain damage. Untrained psychics can sometimes get It may be possible for a psychic to create entirely 
away with using their powers very rarely, but these nat- new techniques to reflect their personal aptitudes and 
ural prodigies rarely have any ability beyond level-1 in a special inclinations. Any such novelty is strictly at the 
discipline. Those who use their powers often enough to GM’s discretion, and unlikely to be done more than 
gain more practical field experience can expect to end once or twice over the lifetime of even the most skilled 
up dead, crippled, or insane. psychic experimenter. 



Psionics •31 

Effort and Psychic Abilities Attitudes Toward Psychics
Psionic powers are fueled by Effort, a measure of the Most worlds have a warily accepting attitude toward 
psychic’s mental focus, energy, and neural responsive- psionic abilities. Provided they’ve received appropriate 
ness. A psychic’s maximum Effort total is equal to one training, a psychic can live and work in relative peace. 
plus the higher of their Wisdom or Constitution at- They are not normally required to wear any sort of 
tribute modifiers, plus their highest psychic skill score. external badge or marking, and they are entitled to 
Thus, a psychic with a Wisdom modifier of -1, a Con- keep their own abilities private from anyone but the 
stitution modifier of +2, and psionic skills of Metap- government if they so wish. They may be subject to 
sionics-0 and Biopsionics-0 would have a maximum mandatory “national service”, depending on the pol-
Effort score of 3. If he were to then improve his Biop- ity, and their special abilities might be impressed by 
sionics skill to level-1, his Effort would become 4. the government in cases of extreme need, but they are 

Effort is “Committed” to fuel a psionic power. able to live a relatively normal, if very well-remuner-
Some Commitment is relatively short-term, lasting ated life. Ordinary men and women have only a vague 
only as long as the power is in effect. Other powers understanding of psychic powers, but they understand 
require that the Effort be Committed for the full scene, enough to know the basic types of disciplines and the 
while the most powerful might require it be Commit- sort of effects each can produce.
ted for the rest of the day. Once the Commitment pe- Other worlds have a warmer attitude towards psy-
riod is over, the Effort returns to the psychic. All Effort chics. Those gifted with MES are elevated above the 
is refreshed after a good night’s rest. ordinary rabble, their abilities celebrated and directed 

Whenever a power requires you to Commit Effort, toward the advantage of their communities. Such so-
you commit only one point, though additional effects cieties often have psychic ability as a prerequisite for 
or triggerings may require separate Commitments. substantial authority, and have worked precognitive 

visions or telepathic scans into the ordinary fabric of 
Torching life. Offworld psychics tend to be treated with consider-
Psychics can push past their limits by “torching”, inten- able respect on these worlds, though sometimes they’re 
tionally ignoring safety protocols and neural refractory also expected to provide services or guidance they may 
periods to channel MES energy beyond their normal not be equipped to give. Citizens of these worlds usu-
capacity. For untrained MES subjects, all their power ally have an excellent understanding of how psychic 
use qualifies as torching, as they lack the training nec- disciplines work, in addition to understanding ways 
essary to develop safe reserves of Effort. to counter them.

Torching is an Instant action that can be per- A few worlds have outright hostility towards psy-
formed once per round. It provides a free point of Ef- chics and their abilities. MES sufferers might be viewed 
fort that lasts for the rest of the scene, even if this point as pitiable victims of a lethal affliction they can’t con-
puts a psychic over the maximum allowed. Every time trol, but trained and capable psychics are threats to be 
the psychic torches, however, they have to roll on the wiped out. Their telepathic probings, cheating fore-
torching result table below. sight, and impossibly elusive teleportation makes them 

a menace to normal human beings, and society cannot 
d6 Torching Result tolerate their existence. Some worlds forbid psionics 
1-2 Lose 1 point from your Wisdom score out of fear of another Scream, while others do so out 

3-4 Lose 1 point from your Constitution score of misunderstandings, a desire for social stability, or lo-
cal conditions that make psionic powers exceptionally 

5 Lose 1 point from an attribute you choose
dangerous. A few of these worlds have private psychic 

6 No harm is done by the torching academies to train psionic myrmidons for the ruling 
Psychics reduced below a Wisdom score of 3 go class or deniable agents of private intrigue.

violently insane and become “feral psychics”; those re- On almost all worlds, however, psychics can ex-
duced below scores of 3 in other attributes likewise pect to suffer considerably harsher legal penalties than 
become dead or nonviable as player characters. There is conventional criminals. Some worlds simply have no 
no available cure for brain damage caused by torching, resources to jail an unwilling teleporter or mind-read-
and even advanced pretech technology has no gener- ing telepath, while others expect those of great gifts to 
ally-known remedy. have correspondingly great virtue. It’s not unknown 

Feral psychics are exceptionally dangerous, as their for psychics to face summary execution for crimes that 
form of brain damage invariably results in violent, psy- would earn other malefactors a simple jail sentence.
chotic behavior and terrifying hallucinations. Worse A few worlds have ancient pretech artifacts or 
still, they can torch with impunity thereafter, as the technologies that are capable of defeating or suppress-
MES energies have already burnt a clear path through ing psychic powers. Such resources are always extreme-
what remains of their sanity. Feral psychics have ef- ly rare, and normally only deployed to protect heads of 
fectively unlimited Effort with what powers they have state and similar top-level figures, along with govern-
obtained. There is no known cure for a feral psychic. ment sites of planetary importance.



32• Biopsionics

Biopsionics

Biopsionic powers repair, augment, debilitate, or dam-
age living creatures. Unless otherwise specified the Mastered Succor Level-1

biopsionicist must be able to touch a target, though The biopsion has developed a sophisticated mastery of 
clothing and armor do not interfere with the use of their core ability, and they no longer need to Commit 
these abilities. Touching a willing or unsuspecting tar- Effort to activate it, and may use it whenever they wish. 
get is automatic, whereas touching a resisting target The use of additional techniques that augment Psychic 

requires a normal Punch hit roll with a bonus equal to Succor might still require Effort to be Committed.
the practitioner’s Biopsionics skill. Such touch effects 
do not inflict the normal damage of a Punch attack. Organic Purification Protocols Level-1

Unsurprisingly, biopsionic powers are among the The biopsion’s Psychic Succor now cures any poisons or 
most accepted psychic abilities. Even a modestly-expe- diseases the subject may be suffering, albeit it requires 
rienced biopsion can perform miracles of healing for a Committing Effort for the day as an additional sur-
community lucky enough to have their services. charge. Biowarfare organisms, exceptionally virulent 

diseases, or TL5 toxins may resist this curing, requiring 
System Strain a Wis/Biopsionics skill check at a difficulty of at least 
Many curative biopsionic powers add to the target’s 10. Failure means that the adept cannot cure the target’s 
System Strain. System Strain is a measure of the amount disease. This technique cannot cure congenital illnesses.
of system stress, intrusive modification, and general bi-
ological distress an organism might be suffering. Psion- Remote Repair Level-1

ic healing, cybernetic implants, and powerful drugs all Psychic Succor and other biopsionic techniques that nor-
add to a target’s System Strain. mally require touch contact can now be applied at a 

If using a power or drug on a target would make distance up to 100 meters, provided the biopsion can 
their System Strain exceed their Constitution score, the see the target with their unaided vision. Hostile powers 
effect fails to function; their body simply cannot adapt that normally require a hit roll will hit automatically. 
to the changes and cannot benefit from them. Each time this technique is used, Effort must be Com-

System Strain decreases automatically by one point mitted for the scene.
after each night of rest, provided the organism is well-
fed and not compromised by sickness or privation. Invincible Stand Level-2

The biopsion has mastered techniques of emergency 
Core Technique- Psychic Succor tissue reinforcement and system stabilization. As an 
The adept’s touch stabilizes critically-wounded organ- Instant action, they can Commit Effort for the scene to 
isms. More sophisticated practitioners can heal tissue keep themself or a target they can touch active even at 
injuries, though curing diseases, detoxifying poisons, zero hit points. This technique must be used once every 
and fixing congenital deformities require additional round on the target or they collapse at the end of the 
techniques. Each use of Psychic Succor adds one point round. If the target suffers hit point damage, the biop-
of System Strain to the target, or two points if they sion must Instantly Commit Effort for the scene or the 
were mortally wounded at the time. target goes down immediately with a mortal wound. A 

Activating Psychic Succor requires the biopsion to Heavy weapon hit on a subject of this power or similar 
Commit Effort for the day. Once used, they can con- physical dismemberment will always kill a target, re-
tinue to use it for the rest of that scene without Com- gardless of this technique.
mitting Effort again.
Level-0: The psychic’s touch can automatically stabilize Major Organ Restoration Level-2

a mortally-wounded target as a Main Action. This The biopsion’s Psychic Succor can now cure congeni-
power must be used on a target within six rounds tal birth defects and regrow missing limbs and organs. 
of their collapse, and does not function on tar- It can even be used to stabilize targets that have been 
gets that have been decapitated or killed by Heavy dropped by Heavy weapons, decapitated, or otherwise 
weapons. It’s the GM’s decision as to whether a dramatically dismembered, provided it’s used within 
target is intact enough for this power to work. one round per level of Biopsionic skill. The best that 

Level-1: As level-0, and heal 1d6+1 hit points of damage. can be done for such badly-mangled targets is stabiliza-
If used on a mortally-wounded target, they revive tion, after which they must rest for 24 hours before any 
with the rolled hit points and can act normally on further hit points can be healed by Biopsionics, stims, 
the next round. or natural rest.

Level-2: As level-1, but healing 2d6+2 hit points instead.
Level-3: As level-2, but healing 2d6+6 hit points instead.
Level-4: As level-3, but healing 3d6+8 hit points instead.



Biopsionics •33 

Tissue Integrity Field Level-2 Holistic Optimization Patterning Level-4

The biopsion’s Psychic Succor may now also affect all The biopsion gains the ability to drastically augment 
allies within ten meters of the target. Allies can decline their own or a touched ally’s physical abilities as an 
the healing if they don’t require it or don’t want to take On Turn action. This boost lasts for the rest of the 
the additional System Strain. Each use of this technique scene, adds two points of System Strain to the target 
requires that the biopsion Commit Effort for the day in and gives them a +2 bonus to all Strength or Dexterity 
addition to the cost of the Psychic Succor. skill checks, hit rolls, and damage rolls along with 20 

extra hit points. Any damage is taken off these tem-
Accelerated Succor Level-3 porary hit points first, and both the bonuses and any 

The biopsion’s Psychic Succor now can be used as an On hit points in excess of the target’s maximum are lost at 
Turn power, albeit only once per round. By Commit- the end of the scene. Each invocation of this technique 
ting an additional Effort for the day with each use, it requires the biopsion to Commit Effort for the day, and 
can even be used as an Instant power, though it still this power cannot be used on a given target more than 
can only be used once per round. Any surcharges for once per scene.
augmenting the succor apply normally, such as with 
Tissue Integrity Field. Quintessential Reconstruction Level-4

The biopsion becomes extremely difficult to kill, en-
Metamorph Level-3 coding their mind in a coherent pattern of MES energy 

The biopsion can now shape their own or another will- coterminous with their realspace coordinates. If killed, 
ing target’s physical form as a Main Action, transform- the psychic will regenerate from the largest remain-
ing a touched target into any humanoid form within ing fragment of their body over 24 hours. This pro-
50% of their own mass. Claws and other body arma- cess maximizes their System Strain for one week. If 
ments can be fashioned equivalent to Light or Medium brought to zero hit points during this week, they die 
melee weapons and innate armor equivalent to AC 13. instantly and permanently. The psychic retains a vague 
Gills and other environmental-survival alterations are awareness of their surroundings while “dead” and can 
also viable at the GM’s discretion, but flight is a bridge postpone their regeneration for up to a week in order 
too far for this power. to avoid notice, but burial or entombment may result in 

A person can be impersonated down to the DNA a very short second life. Each use of this power inflicts 
level, provided a blood or hair sample is available. The one point of permanent attribute loss in an attribute 
use of this adds one System Strain point to the target of the biopsion’s choice.
that does not recover so long as the change is in effect. 
Applying Metamorph requires that the biopsion Commit 
Effort for as long as the change is to be maintained. If Biopsionics and Hospitals
applied to a target other than the psychic, the power Biopsionics is a spectacularly effective discipline 
automatically ends if the psychic gets more than one for curing physical injuries and sicknesses, but 
hundred kilometers away. its use for the latter is capped by the biopsion’s 

available Effort. Hospitals on worlds with access to 
Teratic Overload Level-3 psychic academies often have several biopsions on 

This use of biopsionics inflicts potentially-lethal dam- staff, proficient with the requisite techniques and 
age on a touched target as a Main Action, and requires capable of quickly healing tremendous amounts of 
that the biopsion Commit Effort for the scene. The trauma injuries on short notice.
target suffers 1d6 damage per level of the psychic’s Bi- Assuming one proficient and available biop-
opsionics skill and must make a Physical saving throw. sion for every 100,000 citizens, however, the total 
On a failure, the damage is tripled and the target is now amount of sickness-curing ability is going to be 
affected by an obvious, lethal cancer that will kill them very limited, and likely reserved for the powerful 
in 1d6 months. The cancer can be treated by a TL4 and wealthy. The vanishingly few psychics who 
hospital or ship’s sick bay if managed within a month’s are master metapsions capable of the Flawless 

time. If the biopsion Commits Effort for the day instead Mastery of Organic Purification Protocols can easily 
of the scene, they can control the power sufficiently to command as much as two thousand credits a day 
do no hit point damage and create very subtle tumors, just for temporary work at a grateful hospital.
leaving the cancer undetectable without a TL4 medical Ordinary PC biopsions who want to pick up 
examination. Such victims probably won’t even know some extra work curing sicknesses can usually find 
they’ve been attacked by this power. Whether a success temp employment with a local medical facility for 
or failure, this power cannot be used on the same target 50 credits per day per Effort point they have. Note 
more than once per scene. that some patients may be very upset if the hospital 

fails to assign them the PC’s limited Effort.



34• Metapsionics

Metapsionics

Metapsionics is the rarest and most esoteric of the psy-
chic disciplines, with few psychics having the necessary Cloak Powers Level-1

temperament or interest in developing these complex The metapsion can conceal their own psychic abilities 
abilities. A metapsion controls psychic energy itself, from metapsionic senses. They must Commit Effort 
molding and shaping the flows of energy that spill for as long as they wish to cloak their powers. While 
through the brains of those marked by MES. hidden, only a metapsion with equal or higher skill in 

Taken in isolation, metapsionics allows a psychic Metapsionics can detect their abilities with their level-0 
to increase the raw Effort available to them and become or level-2 Psychic Refinement abilities. In such cases, an 
more flexible in how this Effort is used. Expert metap- opposed Wis/Metapsionics roll is made between the 
sions can even teach other potential psychics how to metapsion and the investigator. If the investigator wins, 
control and channel their new abilities, and the services the cloak is pierced, while if the metapsion wins, the 
of a trained psychic mentor command considerable investigator’s Psychic Refinement remains oblivious.
sums in most systems.

Beyond this, in most stellar sectors a competent Mindtracing Level-1

metapsion is the only practical way to protect a target The metapsion can trace back the use of psionic powers 
from undetectable psychic assault. Without a vigilant they’ve noticed in their presence. By Committing Ef-
brainguard, a head of state, interstellar celebrity, or fort for the scene as an Instant action, they can see and 
planetary oligarch might find their minds rifled effort- hear through the senses of a user of a psychic power, 
lessly by some undetected psychic intruder. gaining an intuitive awareness of their location and 

As a consequence, many metapsions become much treating them as a visible target for purposes of their 
more physically competent and better-trained in com- own abilities. Thus, if they see someone being affected 
bat than the average psychic. The high prices they can by a telepathy power with no visible source, they can 
command as brainguards attract some, though others use this ability to briefly share the hidden telepath’s 
find their clients too aggravating to endure for long. senses. If used on a target that is teleporting, they can 

perceive the teleporter’s view of their destination. Use 
Core Technique- Psychic Refinement on a metamorphically-shaped impostor would reveal 
The metapsion gains improved mastery over their own the biopsion responsible for the change, and so forth. 
powers and an innate sensitivity to the use of psionic These shared senses last for only one round and do not 
abilities in their presence. interfere with the adept’s other actions.
Level-0: The adept can visually and audibly detect the 

use of psychic powers. If both the source and tar- Synthetic Adaptation Level-1

get are visible to the metapsion, they can tell who’s This is a particularly esoteric technique, one that re-
using the power, even if it’s normally impercep- quires the adept to have at least Program-0 or Fix-0 
tible. They gain a +2 bonus on any saving throw skill in order to master. With it, however, the metap-
versus a psionic power. sion has learned how to synergize with the quantum 

Level-1: The metapsion’s maximum Effort increases by intelligence of a VI or True AI in order to apply Telepa-
an additional point. thy or Biopsion powers to their inanimate corpus. Only 

Level-2: The adept can determine whether or not a intelligent machines can be affected, as the technique 
person is a psychic or has latent psionic abilities requires a sentient mind to catalyze the effect.
through one round of visual inspection. Their sav- This synergy takes much of its force from the ad-
ing throw bonus against psionic powers increases ept. Any System Strain the powers might inflict must 
to +3. be paid by the adept rather than the target.

Level-3: The metapsion’s maximum Effort increases by 
an additional point. Neural Trap Level-2

Level-4: The metapsion can perform a slightly safer The metapsion allows a hostile psychic into their men-
version of torching. Instead of rolling the torch- tal sanctum in order to gain a later advantage. When 
ing damage die, they simply suffer 10 hit points of targeted by a hostile psionic power that allows a save, 
damage after torching is used. The damage occurs the metapsion may Commit Effort as an Instant action 
after the fueled power activates, allowing a psychic and voluntarily fail the saving throw, accepting the ef-
at low hit points to trigger a power before falling fect. The next psychic power the user targets at that 
unconscious. This damage cannot be healed by assailant then allows the victim no saving throw. This 
anything but natural bed rest, though a psychic technique lasts until the metapsion makes their psychic 
can be stabilized if this technique drops her to zero attack or reclaims their Committed Effort. A hostile 
hit points. psychic may be affected by only one Neural Trap from 

a given psychic at a time.



Metapsionics •35 

Psychic Static Level-2 Psychic Tutelage Level-3

As an Instant action, the metapsion may Commit Ef- An expert metapsion can modulate and temper the 
fort for the day to negate a perceived psychic power. metadimensional energy that surges through an un-
The psychic responsible for the effect must Commit trained psychic’s mind. This “safety buffer” allows the 
Effort for the day as an Instant action to resist this ne- novice to experiment with their abilities and gradually 
gation, otherwise the power ends and any action used develop the control they need to channel their powers 
to trigger it is wasted. The PC may then Commit Ef- without causing permanent brain damage. Without 
fort for the day again, with each spending and count- this technique, it is virtually impossible to turn a nor-
er-spending until one runs out of Effort or chooses to mal with untapped potential into a trained psychic.
stop. Psychic Static can be applied only once per round An adept with Metapsionics-3 skill can train up to 
to any particular power. The target of the Psychic Stat- ten pupils at once. One with Metapsionics-4 can train 
ic automatically knows the position of the interfering up to one hundred. It requires only a week to train a 
metapsion, though other onlookers do not have any potential in ways to avoid accidentally triggering their 
obvious way of identifying the metapsion. powers and suffering the damage that follows, but actu-

ally teaching them to use their powers effectively takes 
Suspended Manifestation Level-2 anywhere from one to four years depending on their 

The metapsion is capable of “hanging” a psychic power natural aptitude and the availability of other psychics 
in their brain, forming the energy patterns and then willing to assist the metapsion in the training process.
suspending them in a self-sustaining loop until it’s time 
to trigger their release. The psychic must Commit Ef- Surge Momentum Level-3

fort for the day to hang a power, along with the Effort The metapsion’s abilities can be reinforced with a de-
normally necessary to trigger it. None of this Effort can gree of metadimensional energy that would cause sub-
be recovered until the power is expended, after which stantial damage to a less adept mind. Particularly weak 
it recovers at its usual speed. Activating the power is or unprepared minds might be completely crushed by 
an Instant action, or an On Turn action if it allows the the force of the adept’s augmented will.
target a saving throw of some kind. Only one ability The adept must Commit Effort for the day when 
can be held suspended at any one time. using a power that normally grants its target a saving 

throw. The target then suffers a penalty equal to the 
Concert of Minds Level-3 adept’s Metapsionics skill on any saving throw normal-

As an On Turn action, the metapsion may Commit ly granted by the power. If the target’s hit die total or 
Effort and form a psychic gestalt with one or more character level is less than half the adept’s level, round-
willing psychics within three meters, including up to ed up, they automatically fail their saving throw.
one other psychic per Metapsion skill level. This ge-
stalt persists as long as the Effort remains committed, Flawless Mastery Level-4

regardless of the subsequent distance between psychics. When this technique is learned, the adept may choose 
On their own turn, any member of the gestalt may use one technique from any discipline they know. That 
any power or technique known by any other member, technique no longer requires Effort to be Committed in 
using the other member’s skill levels as necessary and any way, though other techniques that augment it may 
paying any Effort cost from their own pool. This gestalt still exact a cost. Mastered Psychic Static, for example, 
shares only psychic power, not thoughts or senses. At can expend an effectively unlimited amount of effort. 
the end of each round in which one or more members If the technique has a duration based on Committed 
have used some other member’s powers or abilities on Effort then it lasts until the metapsion chooses to end it 
their turn of action, the metapsion must Commit Effort or is killed. This technique may only be mastered once, 
for the scene or the gestalt drops and cannot be re-es- though the perfected technique may be changed with 
tablished for the rest of the scene. a month of meditation and practice.

Metadimensional Friction Level-3 Impervious Pavis of Will Level-4

As a Main Action, the metapsion Commits Effort for When this technique is learned, the metapsion must 
the scene to create localized MES turbulence around a choose a discipline. They then become entirely im-
visible target psychic within 200 meters. Each time the mune to unwanted powers from that discipline; they 
target Commits Effort or an NPC initiates a psychic and their abilities are simply not valid targets for pur-
power, they suffer 1d8 damage per Metapsionics skill poses of that discipline’s powers unless the adept choos-
level of the adept. Each time the target suffers the dam- es to be affected. By Committing Effort for the day as 
age they can attempt a Mental saving throw to throw an Instant action, they can extend this immunity for a 
off the effect. It lasts no longer than the rest of the scene scene to all allies within 50 meters. This technique may 
at most. Only one application of this friction can affect be learned more than once, and any shared protection 
a target at once. applies to all disciplines negated by the adept.



36• Precognition

Precognition

The discipline of Precognition relates to sensing the 
cascade of future events and reading the achronal cha- Core Technique- Oracle
os of the metadimensional energy that ripples in the The precog gains a progressively-greater intuitive un-
psychic’s brain. Readings provided by Precognition derstanding of their own future. Each invocation of 
tend to be focused on the psychic and what they find the Oracle technique requires a Main Action and that 
interesting or important. Matters irrelevant to the seer the user Commit Effort for the day. Once triggered, 
are unlikely to be noticed, even if they are of critical the adept gets a single brief vision related to the ques-
importance to those involved. More advanced tech- tion about the future that they’re asking. This vision 
niques of Precognition can even influence the future, is always from their own personal vantage point and 
adjusting probabilities by changing or pruning certain never reveals more than a minute of insight, though 
metadimensional currents. the psychic processes it almost instantly as part of the 

The future is not carved in stone. Oracles can be power’s use.
falsified by present action or sheer random chance. The GM should answer the question as if the 
When a reading is ambiguous or the future seems un- PC were about to perform the act or engage in the 
certain, the GM should simply give the most probable investigation pertinent to the question. Thus, if the 
reading for the power as their own judgment recom- adept wanted to know what pressing a button would 
mends. do and the GM knows that it’s connected to a bomb, 

Precognition is strictly future-oriented. For as- the psychic might get a vision of sudden death. If the 
sorted complex reasons, the past is vastly more difficult bomb were on a time delay that extended past the time 
to observe with psionic powers, and postcognition is horizon of the oracle, however, the psychic might just 
generally considered impossible. see a vision of herself waiting patiently, with nothing 

Precogs are generally viewed with considerable happening.
unease by the general population. They’re not as widely Visions should relate to actions and events, not 
feared as telepaths, but the uncanny powers of foresight abstract facts. Oracle couldn’t tell a psychic who the 
they possess can make them difficult company. They crime boss of a slum neighborhood is, for example, but 
can earn very substantial sums of money from those it could give a vision of the psychic caught in the next 
desperate to learn of some future outcome, but the bloody riot and the gang boss who’s directing the myri-
specificity of their visions makes it difficult for them ad thugs. It couldn’t reveal the name of a security guard, 
to perceive large-scale future events. but it could show the seer the impending moment that 

A precog can see a city in flames or a stock market the next guard patrol will enter the area the psychic 
board showing a crash, but even the most powerful plans to infiltrate. Only the most important or signifi-
can’t tell if the conflagration is just a limited local disas- cant information is conveyed by the technique, even if 
ter or a planet-consuming catastrophe, nor can they tell multiple events of interest might transpire during the 
if the crash is a temporary pullback in the market or a time horizon.
harbinger of global depression. Many precogs have dif- Oracle can only be used on a given question or topic 
ficulty dealing with this ambiguity, and some become once until the situation changes substantially or a week 
fixed on personal interpretations of their visions that goes by. The maximum time horizon of the Oracle in-
may or may not play out as they have seen. creases as the adept’s Precognition skill improves.

Level-0: One minute into the future.
Bending the Future Level-1: One day into the future.
Everything a precog sees is provisional. Some outcomes Level-2: One week into the future.
may be so likely as to be nigh-certain, but nothing is Level-3: Three months into the future.
truly, absolutely destined. Vigorous activity or simple Level-4: One year into the future.
unexpected chance can skew future outcomes.

This effect is one reason why choirs of precogs 
have not been more widely exploited by planetary Intuitive Response Level-1

governments. The clearer and more detailed a future As an Instant action, the precog can Commit Effort for 
outcome becomes, the simpler it is to find the crucial the scene just before they roll initiative. Their initia-
events that can be changed to derail it. The more in- tive score is treated as one better than anyone else’s 
tense the precognitive focus toward a future event, involved in the scene. If another participant has this 
the more fluid it becomes as fresh readings take into power or some other ability that grants automatic ini-
account the countermoves that others have made. Ru- tiative success, roll initiative normally to determine 
mors persist of ancient pretech augmentation hardware which of them goes first, and then the rest of the com-
that can “fix” future outcomes, but most governments batants act. This ability cannot be used if the precog 
lack the resources to even consider such extravagance. has been surprised.



Precognition •37 

Sense the Need Level-1 Cursed Luck Level-3

At some point in the recent past, the psychic had a Negative probabilities are woven tightly around a vis-
vague but intense premonition that a particular object ible animate target, including robots and animals but 
would be needed. By triggering this power as an Instant not including vehicles. Triggering this technique re-
action and Committing Effort for the day, the psychic quires a Main Action and Committing Effort for the 
can retroactively declare that they brought along any scene. The target must roll any attack rolls, damage 
one object that they could have reasonably acquired rolls, skill checks, and saving throws twice and take the 
and carried to this point. This object must be plausible worst result each time. Any attempts to hit the target 
given recent events; if the psychic has just been strip- or damage dice rolled against it may be rolled twice and 
searched, very few objects could reasonably have been the better result taken. Intelligent targets can make a 
kept, while a psychic who’s just passed through a weap- Mental saving throw at the end of each round to throw 
ons check couldn’t still have a loaded laser pistol. off the effect; this save is not penalized by the power.

Terminal Reflection Level-1 Forced Outcome Level-3

The psychic’s Oracle power automatically triggers as an Through careful manipulation of probability, the adept 
Instant action moments before some unexpected dan- can influence random physical events in their vicinity. 
ger or ambush, giving the precog a brief vision of the Triggering this technique requires a Main Action and 
impending hazard. This warning comes just in time to Committing Effort for the scene. Any simple, random 
avoid springing a trap or to negate combat surprise for mechanical outcome can be completely controlled for 
the precog and their companions. If the psychic does the scene, such as a roulette wheel or the order of a 
not immediately Commit Effort for the day, this sense deck of shuffled cards. Any other physical event in the 
goes numb and this technique cannot be used for the area that seems not-entirely-implausible may be made 
rest of the day. to occur by this technique, provided it doesn’t involve 

more than a few objects and doesn’t require human 
Alternate Outcome Level-2 involvement. The GM decides what random events are 

The precog can sense impending failure and attempt and are not adequately possible. Anything more than 
to salvage the action. As an Instant action, the precog one unusual coincidence or chance per scene is likely 
can target a visible ally or their own self and Commit impossible to produce.
Effort for the day to allow the target to reroll a failed 
hit roll, saving throw, or skill check, taking the better Not My Time Level-4

of the two rolls. This power disrupts delicate lines of The precog instinctively wrenches the lines of proba-
probability, however, and cannot be used on any given bility away from futures in which they are about to die. 
target more than once a day. This technique triggers automatically when the pre-

cog is about to die, provided they can Commit Effort 
Destiny’s Shield Level-2 for the day. On triggering, random events somehow 

The precog observes an incoming injury and tries to conspire to leave the precog alive, even if outrageous 
find an alternate future in which the attack misses. As coincidences and ridiculous luck are required. Provided 
an Instant action, the precog can Commit Effort for the precog doesn’t intentionally thrust herself back into 
the day to force an attacker to reroll a successful hit danger, their life is secured for the next few minutes at 
roll. This technique only works on attacks against the least, though there’s no guarantee the psychic will sur-
psychic’s person, not against attacks aimed at a vehicle vive intact in mind or body. This technique can trigger 
they’re occupying or harm that doesn’t involve an at- no more often than once per week.
tack roll. If the rerolled attack still hits, however, the 
damage done is maximized. This technique can be used Prophecy Level-4

only once per incoming attack. The power of the precog extends to dictating future 
events that directly involve them. As a Main Action, 

Anguished Vision Level-3 the precognitive PC may make one prediction involv-
The adept’s precognition is sophisticated enough to ing their personal future or future condition within 
clearly foresee several seconds into the future. As an the next year. Provided they take reasonable measures 
Instant action, the psychic may Commit Effort for the to enable this prediction, that no direct resistance is 
day and declare that what they have just done or seen mounted by an enemy, and that the prediction doesn’t 
is a vision of the immediate future. Time rolls back seem highly improbable to the GM, it will come to pass. 
to the start of the initiative count in a combat turn, The adept must Commit Effort when this power is used, 
or six seconds earlier if out of combat. Nothing that and the Effort remains Committed until the prophecy 
happened during that round has really come to pass yet. comes to pass or is abandoned. This ability cannot be 

This ability is tremendously draining, and can be used more than once per month and only one prophecy 
used only once per day. may be active at a time.



38• Telekinesis

Telekinesis

Telekinetic abilities are something of a mixed bless-
ing to those psychics who have them. While they Kinetic Transversal Level-1

are among the least feared and distrusted of psychic The adept may Commit Effort as an On Turn action to 
powers, they also produce effects that are not nearly move freely over vertical or overhanging surfaces as if 
so widely-demanded as biopsionic healing or metap- they were flat ground, crossing any solid surface strong 
sionic brainguarding. A telekinetic must be canny and enough to bear five kilos of weight. They can also move 
creative to get the most from their abilities. over liquids at their full movement rate. This move-

Telekinetic powers are strong but somewhat im- ment ability lasts as long as the Effort is committed. 
precise. The force they generate is usually invisible, 
though a psychic can allow a visible glow if desired, and Pressure Field Level-1

the source of the telekinetic manipulation is not obvi- As an Instant action, the adept can manifest a protective 
ous to ordinary senses. Objects being held or worn by force skin around their person equivalent to a vacc suit, 
a mobile creature cannot normally be manipulated by maintaining pressure and temperature even in hard 
telekinesis, nor can unwilling intelligent targets be di- vacuum conditions. They can ignore temperatures at 
rectly manipulated. Machines, including non-sentient a range of plus or minus 100 degrees Celsius and auto-
robots, can be affected as any other inanimate object, matically pressurize thin atmospheres for breathability, 
however. The psychic cannot use this discipline to lift or filter particulates or airborne toxins. By Committing 
their own person without special techniques. Effort for the scene, they can shield up to six comrades. 

Some techniques refer to a “physical attack” or This lasts until the user reclaims the Effort.
“physical damage”. This means a straightforward kinetic 
impact: bullets, punches, collisions, falls, compressions, Telekinetic Armory Level-1

or the like. Energy attacks are not included. The adept may Commit Effort as an On Turn action to 
create both weapons and armor out of telekinetic force. 

Core Technique- Telekinetic Manipulation These weapons are treated as tech level 4 and act as a 
The adept may Commit Effort for the scene as a Main rifle or any advanced melee weapon. Attack rolls can 
Action to direct telekinetic force toward an object or use either Dexterity, Wisdom, or Constitution modifi-
person within unaided visual range or with tactile ers, and may use the Telekinesis skill as the combat skill.
contact with the psychic. This force isn’t responsive Armor may be created as part of this power, grant-
enough to be effective as a weapon without further ing the psychic a base Armor Class equal to 15 plus their 
refinement of technique, and cannot cause damage to Telekinesis skill level. This armor does not stack with 
living or mobile targets. If used to crush or harm im- conventional armor, but Dexterity or shields modify 
mobile unliving objects, it does 1d6 damage per skill it as usual. The gear continues to exist as long as the 
level of the psychic per round of focus. Objects move at psychic chooses to leave the Effort committed, and they 
20 meters per round when moved telekinetically. may be invisible or visible at the psychic’s discretion.

A telekinetic force can be maintained over multi-
ple rounds without expending further actions, such as Impact Sump Level-2

holding a metal platform in place under a group of al- The adept may Commit Effort for the day as an Instant 
lies, but the psychic cannot again activate this technique action to negate a single instance of physical damage. 
on a second object until they release the first. This ability is too taxing to be used more than once per 
Level-0: The psychic can exert force as if with one hand day, but as an Instant action, it can be triggered even 

and their own strength. after damage is rolled.
Level-1: The psychic can manipulate objects as if with 

both hands and can lift up to two hundred kilo- Slip Field Level-2

grams with this ability. As a Main Action, the psychic Commits Effort for the 
Level-2: The psychic can lift or manipulate up to four scene and decreases the friction at a point in sight. Up 

hundred kilograms and smash a human-sized to ten meters in diameter is affected, making it difficult 
hole in structures of light wooden construction for enemies to move from their current position. All 
or lighter as a Main Action. chosen targets must make an Evasion saving throw or 

Level-3: The psychic can manipulate up to eight hun- fall prone, becoming unable to stand up or move more 
dred kilograms and can affect as many individual than a meter per Move action taken. If used against a 
objects at once as they have Telekinesis skill levels. ground vehicle, the driver must make a Dex/Pilot skill 

Level-4: The psychic can manipulate up to a metric ton check at a difficulty of 8 plus the adept’s Telekinesis 
and can smash human-sized holes in TL4-con- skill or go out of control, driving directly forward for 
structed exterior walls, light stone walls, or similar a round and crashing into any obstacles. Targets who 
barriers as a Main Action. save are immune to this technique for the scene.



Telekinesis •39 

Telekinetic Expertise Level-2 Force Puppetry Level-4

The adept has become familiar enough with the ma- As a Main Action, the telekinetic can Commit Effort for 
nipulation of telekinetic force that they may now use the day to suborn a visible target’s mobility, whether 
Telekinetic Manipulation without Committing Effort. robotic, vehicular, or human, provided it’s no larger 

than a ground car. A sapient victim can make a Men-
Thermokinesis Level-2 tal saving throw to resist the psychic onslaught; on a 

Telekinetic power involves kinetic energy, but a suf- failure, they lose control of their physical actions. If not 
ficiently sophisticated grip on motion can be used to piloted by the telekinetic, the target remains motionless 
agitate the molecules of an inanimate object and cause or continues on its current direction of travel. If the 
it to melt or burst into flame. Similar focus can chill or telekinetic spends a Main Action to control them, they 
freeze such substances. can be made to perform any physical action that is not 

Applying Thermokinesis to a target requires that directly suicidal, using the psychic’s skill levels and hit 
the adept Commit Effort for the scene as a Main Action. bonus for any attacks or skill checks they might make. 
Thermokinesis cannot affect objects larger than the adept The puppetry lasts until the end of the scene, until the 
could lift with their Telekinetic Manipulation. target leaves the psychic’s sight, or until a sapient target 

As with other telekinetic powers, this ability does believes that their action or inaction is about to get 
not work on objects being held or used by intelligent them killed. The psychic’s control is fine enough to 
creatures. Non-sentient robots or other objects with hit achieve even very delicate physical motions, but it is 
points take 1d12 damage per level of Telekinesis skill not good enough to control the target’s speech, though 
each time this technique is applied to them. it can keep them silent.

Tangible Force Construct Level-3 Telekinetic Flight Level-4

Once per turn, as an On Turn action, the psychic can As an Instant action, the telekinetic can Commit Effort 
Commit Effort for the scene to create a telekinetic force to begin flying, and may extend this effect to up to a 
construct at a visible point, provided it can fit within half-dozen unresisting, human-sized allies within 30 
a three-meter cube. The force construct can be shaped meters. While flying, the psychic can move at twice 
in any way the psychic wishes, and can remain fixed in their normal movement rate in any direction They can 
its location without external supports if desired. It is plunge earthward at up to terminal velocity without 
as sturdy as a TL4 construction and may be visible or harm, and even orbital insertions are survivable with 
invisible at the adept’s choice. The construct lasts until this power if a vacc suit is available or the Pressure Field 
the end of the scene, until the psychic dispels it, or until technique is used. Allies must end their turns within 30 
it is smashed with 20 points of damage against AC 15. meters of the psychic to maintain this flight but control 

their own motion. As an Instant, this power may be 
Telekinetic Ram Level-3 triggered in time to negate falling damage. The flight 

As a Main Action, the psychic can Commit Effort for lasts for as long as the Effort remains Committed.
the scene to target a tremendous, uncontrolled burst of 
force at a single target within sight. This burst requires 
some time to detonate, however, and will only go off Bot Scrapping

at the end of the next round. Targets of this technique While telekinetic powers can’t normally be used to 
are aware of an oppressive, electrical tingling in the air harm an intelligent target without a special tech-
and are apt to instinctively move; this technique is thus nique, non-sentient robots have no such protec-
generally useless against any target that is not entirely tion. A VI or True AI can create enough metad-
immobile, as any movement of a chosen target disrupts imensional static with their cognition to prevent 
the ram. Once the ram detonates, however, it is suffi- harm from telekinesis, but ordinary guard bots, 
cient to destroy any immobile civilian vehicle, create a servitor droids, or warbots are extremely suscep-
five-meter hole in anything short of hardened military tible to telekinetic destruction.
fortifications, or inflict 5d12 damage on anything else In most cases, this is as simple a matter as 
as if it were struck by a Heavy weapon. telekinetically lifting and then dropping the bot. A 

psychic can destroy as many such bots in a round 
Reactive Telekinesis Level-3 as they can telekinetically manipulate; one for 

As an Instant action, the psychic can Commit Effort for most, or three or four at higher skill levels. This 
the scene whenever an assailant misses them with a also assumes the psychic can lift the bot’s weight.
physical attack. The attack is then reflected back against Some military bots may be resilient enough 
the assailant, who must reroll the attack against their to handle this battering, suffering 1d10 damage 
own person twice. If either roll hits, the assailant suf- per level of Telekinesis skill the psychic possesses. 
fers damage from their own attack. If both rolls hit, the Most have no such chance of survival.
damage is the maximum possible.



40• Telepathy

Telepathy

There is no psychic power more threatening and dis-
turbing to normal humanity than that of telepathy. Core Technique- Telepathic Contact
The prospect of having one’s innermost thoughts and The telepath can obtain a progressively-deeper under-
secrets pried out by imperceptible means is deeply trou- standing of a sentient target’s thoughts. The target must 
bling to most men and women, and telepaths are often be visible or otherwise perceptible to the telepath’s un-
given a wide berth by others simply for fear of what aided senses. Opening a contact requires the telepath to 
private thoughts they might sift out. Commit Effort for the day as a Main Action, and the 

Some worlds that are otherwise accepting of psy- contact lasts for a scene at most unless augmented by 
chic powers go so far as to ban known telepaths and other techniques.
forbid the teaching of the discipline within their terri- The depth of contact that can be made depends on 
tory. Even those few that do, however, can rarely re- the psychic’s Telepathy skill. A single contact can use 
sist the urge to maintain some “government-approved” any or all of the effects permitted to a telepath of the 
telepathic training program for candidates selected for user’s skill level. Basic forms of contact do not allow for 
their political trustworthiness or powerful backers. a saving throw, though more advanced probes allow 
The benefits of having an imperceptible mental spy the target to make a Mental saving throw to resist. On 
are too great for most states to forgo. a successful save, no form of this technique that allows 

Most worlds do not ban telepaths. On these plan- a save can be used on them for the rest of the scene.
ets, the sheer rarity of psychic powers and the limited Level-0: Observe emotional states in a target. Intense 
chance that any one individual might be unlawfully emotions provide a single word or image related 
scanned outweigh any fear of unchecked telepathic in- to the focus of the feelings.
trusion. Telepathic testimony is almost never accepted Level-1: A shallow gestalt with the target’s language cen-
in a court of law, however, outside of the most psy- ters allows the telepath to understand any form of 
chic-centered societies. communication made by the target. If the psychic 

Almost all worlds forbid the uninvited use of tele- has the requisite body parts to speak the target’s 
pathic powers on another person. The crime is very dif- language, they can communicate with it in turn.
ficult to prove, but usually comes with harsh penalties. Level-2: The psychic’s awareness of the target’s surface 
Open admission of an illicit scan is generally considered cognition is sophisticated enough to read their 
proof, so PC telepaths are advised to be discreet. current thoughts, though it can’t pick up memo-

Telepathic shielding devices and substances do ries or non-obvious connections. The target gets 
exist in very limited amounts. Even during the height a Mental saving throw to resist this.
of the Mandate, such resources were never abundant. Level-3: The psychic can drill down into the target’s 
Nowadays, only heads of state and similar elite per- memory to get a one or two-sentence answer to 
sonages might expect to shelter behind psionics-proof any single question they ask, or receive a single 
walls or have devices to alert them to telepathic tam- answering vision of the target’s recollections. The 
pering. Even then, many worlds will simply lack the target can attempt a Mental saving throw to resist 
pretech artifacts to erect such protection, even for their this power, and whether or not it succeeds the 
most important members. contact is automatically ended. It can be re-estab-

lished, but only by activating this technique again.
Using and Detecting Telepathy Level-4: The psychic instantly gets a full and nuanced 
Telepathy operates at a very basic level of mental con- awareness of everything the target can remember 
tact, and is not impeded by a lack of shared languag- about a particular topic. The target can attempt 
es. While the basic forms of telepathy only function a Mental saving throw to resist this power, and 
on intelligent creatures, aliens or transhumans with whether or not it succeeds the contact is automat-
human-like cognition can be affected. VIs, True AIs, ically ended afterwards. It can be re-established, 
and other non-biological intelligences are not normally but only by activating this technique again.
subject to Telepathy techniques.

Telepathy is a subtle ability, and targets of its tech- Facile Mind Level-1

nique will not normally be aware of it. Only those with The telepath is practiced at opening a Telepathic Contact, 
metapsionic expertise or Telepathy-0 skill or greater and need only Commit Effort for the scene to do so, in-
can tell when they’ve been targeted by Telepathy. Oth- stead of Committing Effort for the day. If contacting an 
ers may suspect this influence, particularly if they’re ally who has practiced the process with the psychic for 
aware of the existence of psychics and have just done at least a week, opening the contact normally requires 
something utterly inexplicable to their own reasoning. no Effort at all. In both cases, if the telepath chooses to 
Certain extremely rare TL5 devices can also alert a tar- Commit Effort for the day, they can open a Telepathic 

get to the presence of telepathic tampering. Contact as an Instant action rather than a Main Action.



Telepathy •41 

Transmit Thought Level-1 Telepathic Control
The telepath can send thoughts and images over a Tele- Telepathy is not a discipline well-suited to direct 
pathic Contact, allowing two-way communication with mental control of other beings. While a telepath 
a willing target as an Instant action when desired. can impart urges and thoughts to a target, they 

lack the tools to assume direct control of a victim’s 
Far Thought Level-2 physical actions. The best they can do is implant 

Once a telepath has made a Telepathic Contact with a ideas in the target’s head and try to hijack the 
target, they can thereafter activate the technique when- short-term cognition of the victim.
ever that target is within 100 kilometers, whether or Persistent legends speak of more direct dis-
not the psychic knows where they are. At Telepathy-3 ciplines practiced during the Mandate’s heyday. 
the range increases to 1,000 kilometers, and at Telepa- These arts supposedly allowed a psychic to take 
thy-4 it extends over an entire planet and up to orbital direct control of a subject’s physical form, manip-
distances. This distant connection is tenuous, however, ulating it with effortless ease to perform whatever 
and the psychic cannot use any technique through it acts the psychic desired. Unlike telepathy, how-
that would allow the target a saving throw to resist. ever, these disciplines were unable to touch the 

cognitive centers of a target or read their mental 
Suppress Cognition Level-2 activity. If any such disciplines ever existed, their 

Through intense focus, the telepath can make the target possessors are doubtless very discreet with them.
of a Telepathic Contact simply not think about some-
thing, whether that’s the presence of the telepath, the 
possibility of committing violence, the absence of im- Memory Editing Level-4
portant documentation, or any other single potential 
action or one specific person. This technique requires The telepath can make simple edits to the memory of 
the psychic to Commit Effort for the scene as a Main a target currently linked by a Telepathic Contact. Events 
Action. The target gets a Mental saving throw to resist of no more than 24 hours in duration can be erased 
this power and become immune to it for the scene. If from memory, conversations can be created or changed, 
failed, the thought remains unthinkable for the rest of new events can be added to a day, or other similar al-
the scene unless the target perceives physical danger or terations made. The psychic can make these changes 
a traumatic threat to something they prize highly. In as a Main Action by Committing Effort for the day. If 
that case, the block instantly dissolves and cannot be the psychic doesn’t have a good understanding of the 
re-established during the scene. Once the effect ends, memories they’re changing, such as might be granted 
the target will remain oblivious to their temporary by the level-4 degree of Telepathic Contact, the edits they 
fugue unless it is brought to their attention somehow. make may not fit well. The target gets a Mental saving 

throw to resist editing for the rest of the scene, but on 
Reflex Response Level-3 a failure, they will not notice the changed memories 

As a Main Action, the telepath can Commit Effort for until given a reason to recollect them.
the day to force a sudden, irrational impulse into the 
target of a Telepathic Contact. The target may make a Unity of Thought Level-4

Mental saving throw to resist; on a failure, they will The telepath becomes exceptionally skilled at weaving 
use their next available action to carry out the impulse together multiple allied minds. When they establish a 
to the best of their ability. This impulse cannot be Telepathic Contact with a willing ally they may bind up to 
self-injurious or harmful to a loved one, but it can be six willing participants into the same contact without 
foolish, reckless, or harmful to others. The target may further Effort. This multi-person link is relatively shal-
not understand why they have done the action, but will low, and allows only the Instant exchange of thoughts, 
usually attempt to rationalize it as their choice. images, and sensory impressions. While under its ef-

fect, every participant knows the exact location and 
Telepathic Assault Level-3 condition of all others, and uses the best Initiative roll 

The telepath Commits Effort for the day as a Main of any of them if combat commences. At the table, up 
Action to force a wave of metadimensional energy to five minutes of discussion and coordination among 
through the brain of a Telepathic Contact target. The the players can be arranged each round without incur-
assault does 6d6 damage, or 9d6 damage if the telepath ring delays for the PCs. Every combat turn, one gestalt 
has Telepathy-4 skill. The target may make a Mental member of the psychic’s choice gets an extra round of 
saving throw to halve the damage. This assault cannot action to represent the benefits of the perfect coordina-
kill a target, but can knock them unconscious for an tion of the group. The psychic cannot gain this bonus 
hour if they’re reduced to zero hit points, after which round himself. The telepathic link lasts as long as the 
they wake up with one hit point. A victim cannot be psychic initiates no new Telepathic Contact, and it has a 
targeted by an assault more than once per scene. range that extends to any point within a solar system.



42• Teleportation

Teleportation

Teleporters do not provoke the kind of persistent 
worry that telepaths induce in most normals, but their Core Technique- Personal Apportation
particular gifts cause a more physical concern. An ex- The teleporter can translocate to another location they 
perienced teleporter can reach or see into any location have either occupied before or can see with their unaid-
they’ve ever been; security officials don’t just need to ed vision. Locations are fixed in reference to the nearest 
make sure that no teleporter is in a restricted area, but major gravity well. For example, it is not possible to 
that they’ve never been there before at any time. Access teleport to the cockpit of a distant moving vehicle they 
into the most important areas is carefully filtered to once occupied, but they can teleport to another point 
ensure that no outside teleporter ever gets a chance to on a planet’s surface even though the planet has since 
see a location they might suddenly appear in several moved far through the stellar void.
months or years later. The core technique allows the teleporter to move 

Most governments with access to trained psychics himself and any mass he is able to carry with his own 
will have at least a few expert teleporters on hand to natural strength. Resisting targets cannot be carried 
provide untraceable communications links and super- along, and unresisting ones must be touched. A tele-
lative infiltrators. Despite their many advantages in in- porter can leave any clothing, shackles, adhesions, or 
trusion and evasion, however, a teleporter needs the other matter behind when he teleports, but he cannot 
skills to actually get into a restricted area before they leave behind matter that has been inserted into his 
can take advantage of a quick escape. It’s not unknown body, such as cybernetics or shrapnel. Matter cannot 
for teleporters to be paired with more conventional be partially left behind.
burglars who supply the security-defeating skills and A teleporter will instinctively abort any apporta-
information-gathering talents that a professional psy- tion that would leave him embedded in a solid object 
chic doesn’t always have the time to cultivate. or in an environment of imminent physical harm. Any 

The criminal applications of teleportation are ob- Committed Effort on such aborted jumps is wasted, as 
vious, as is its utility in surveillance. Some bold tele- is any action spent triggering the power.
porters make excellent money as thieves or spies for The maximum range of Personal Apportation de-
whatever employer can afford their exorbitant fees. pends on the teleporter’s skill level. Teleporting with 
The price for their services is invariably high, not only Personal Apportation counts as a Main Action and re-
due to the rarity of experienced teleporters, but due to quires that the psychic Commit Effort for the scene.
the consequences of arrest. Level-0: The psychic can teleport up to 10 meters.

As tempting as the criminal path can be for many Level-1: The psychic can teleport up to 100 meters.
teleporters, most are dissuaded by the penalties. Very Level-2: The psychic can teleport up to 10 kilometers.
few worlds have prison facilities that are in any way de- Level-3: The psychic can teleport up to 1,000 kilometers.
signed to cope with teleporting inmates. On advanced Level-4: The psychic can teleport anywhere on a plan-
worlds, this means that criminal teleporters are often et’s surface or near orbit.
implanted with surgical bombs keyed to explode if they 
leave a restricted area or stop receiving a specific signal 
from a government transmitter. On primitive worlds, Proficient Apportation Level-1

this means that criminal teleporters face summary exe- Personal Apportation now counts as a Move action, 
cution for any crime more serious than a misdemeanor. though it still can be performed only once per round. 

Some devices can be used to defeat teleporters, Apportations of 10 meters or less no longer require 
creating a curdled patch of metadimensional space Effort to be Committed, though any augments to the 
that is impossible to enter or leave via teleportation. technique must still be paid for normally.
These ancient pretech artifacts are invariably ridicu-
lously expensive in the unlikely case that a planetary 
government allows them to remain in private hands at Spatial Awareness Level-1

all, and only the most important figures of an advanced The psychic may Commit Effort as an On Turn ac-
world will have any access to teleporter-sealed “safe tion to gain an intuitive 360-degree awareness of their 
zones”. Many worlds have no access to such devices at physical surroundings. The sense is roughly equivalent 
all, with even princes and potentates left to keep a wary to sight out to 100 meters, though it cannot read text 
eye on teleporting psychics. A metapsion brainguard is or distinguish colors. It is blocked by solid objects but 
the usual low-tech answer to psychic threats, if such an is unimpeded by darkness, mist, blinding light, holo-
expensive mercenary can be hired on the world. grams, or optical illusions. The sense lasts as long as the 

Effort remains Committed to the technique.



Teleportation •43 

Burdened Apportation Level-2 Rift Reduplication Level-3

The psychic can carry willing companions with them Expert teleporters can be infuriatingly difficult to pin 
when using Personal Apportation. Up to three hu- down. By Committing an additional Effort for the day 
man-sized companions and their man-portable gear as an Instant action, the adept can use Personal Apporta-

may be carried per skill level in Teleportation. Allies tion as an On Turn action, even if they’ve already used it 
must be within 3 meters of the teleporter to be carried once this round. Apporting itself costs whatever Effort 
along. Ordinary inert matter cannot be carried along it normally would, in addition to any techniques that 
unless the psychic is touching it or it’s being carried by augment it. Rift Reduplication can only be triggered once 
an ally affected by this power. If carrying inert mass, up per round.
to two hundred kilos of objects can be carried per skill If the adept uses their powers to teleport into a 
level. Using this technique increases the Effort cost of location, perform an action, and then use Rift Redupli-

Personal Apportation, requiring that an extra point of cation to teleport back out, onlookers in the area will 
Effort be Committed for the day. not have time to react to their action or attack the adept 

unless the onlookers have held their action explicitly 
to counter the psychic. Enemies who hold their action 

Perceptive Dislocation Level-2 this way waste it entirely if the psychic does not give 
Commit Effort for the day to sense any location the them a chance to attack or otherwise interfere. Such a 
psychic could teleport to. The psychic perceives the lightning strike may be surprising to onlookers, but it 
location as if there, lasting for fifteen minutes at most. doesn’t allow enough preparation time to count as an 

Execution Attack as described on page 52.

Spatial Synchrony Mandala Level-2

The psychic imprints a particular object or person on Deep Intrusion Level-4

their psionic awareness. Provided the object is relative- The adept can use Personal Apportation to blind-teleport 
ly intact and in range of their Personal Apportation, the into a building, structure, vehicle, or spaceship visible 
psychic always knows its exact location and can teleport to them, including spaceships close enough to engage 
to within three meters of it with Personal Apportation in conventional ship-to-ship combat. They intuitively 
even if it has moved from its original location. Im- seek out a space large enough to hold them and without 
printing an object requires an hour’s meditation with immediate environmental hazards, but cannot control 
it, and only one object can be imprinted at a time. If their precise destination. Using this technique in con-
imprinting on a person, the target must be willing and junction with Personal Apportation is very draining to 
cooperative to make the imprint. Objects must be at the psychic, and requires that they Commit an addi-
least one kilogram in mass to be effectively tracked. tional Effort point for the day.

Effortless Apportation Level-3 Offensive Apportation Level-4

The psychic does not need to Commit Effort to use The psychic can use Personal Apportation as a Main Ac-
Personal Apportation. If the technique is augmented by tion to teleport an unwilling target, provided the user 
other techniques that come with their own extra or in- can make physical contact with them. Contact with an 
creased cost, however, this extra cost must still be paid. unsuspecting or incapacitated target is automatic, while 

touching a resisting enemy requires a Punch hit roll 
with a bonus equal to the psychic’s Teleportation skill. 

Stutterjump Level-3 If the psychic does not use the Burdened Apportation 

The psychic can instinctively micro-teleport away from technique then only the target is teleported; otherwise 
incoming danger. As an On Turn action they may the user may go along with them. The psychic cannot 
Commit Effort to begin shifting their spatial position teleport a target to any location they could not tele-
away from attacks, gaining a base Armor Class of 20 port to, including locations of imminent environmen-
so long as the Effort remains Committed. This Armor tal danger, such as high in the air, into a windowless 
Class is not modified by armor, shields, or Dexterity tomb, or into the middle of a sea. A conscious, resist-
modifiers, and the micro-jumps do not significantly ing target can make a Mental saving throw to forcibly 
move the psychic from their current location. While abort the teleportation, rolling at a penalty equal to 
Stutterjump is active, as an Instant action the adept may the psychic’s Teleportation skill. Use of this technique 
Commit Effort for the day to negate a successful hit by adds to the cost of Personal Apportation, requiring the 
a weapon attack, even after damage has been rolled. psychic Commit an additional point of Effort for the 
This reflexive defensive jump may be used only once day whether the touch hits or not.
per day and leaves the psychic just outside the radius 
of explosions or other area-effect attacks.






SYSTEMS
Even the most capable interstellar adventurer some- gain more hit points, but there’s no PC that can laugh 
times encounters a situation where the outcome is by off a dozen combat infantrymen with mag rifles and a 
no means certain. When an alien assassin thrusts a will to use them. Don’t assume your character is going 
blade at an unguarded back, or the ship threatens to to survive an experience just because they’re a PC.
careen out of control in a gas giant’s upper atmosphere, 
or when the hero has been critically injured and lies Using the Systems
bleeding on a cavern floor, how do you tell what’s going Stars Without Number is built to support a sandbox 
to happen next? This chapter provides you with certain gaming experience, and the systems in this chapter 
basic systems you can use to resolve these questions. are part of that. By default, they’re meant to be fair, 

understandable, and flexible enough to be applied to 
The Basic Mechanics many situations. They’re not meant to especially fa-
The three primary systems that most heroes are go- vor the PCs, however, or to give them ways to bypass 
ing to interact with most often are skill checks, sav- the results of some poor decision or unlucky moment. 
ing throws, and combat rounds. Every player and GM There is no “narrative currency” the player can spend 
ought to read those sections and understand the basic to avert disaster. This is not the only way a group can 
mechanisms involved, because they’re going to be see- play the game, but it is intentionally the default mode.
ing a lot of them in their star-faring adventures. It’s not that these systems are perfect, but that 

Skill checks tell you whether or not your hero suc- they are an unbiased third party to your gaming ses-
ceeds at a particular feat of expertise or natural com- sion. When the GM calls for a skill check, or rolls a hit 
petence. Whenever it’s uncertain whether or not your roll for an alien warlord’s chainaxe, he honestly doesn’t 
hero can manage a feat, your GM might call for a skill know what’s going to happen. His judgment might ap-
check. Failure at the roll means that your hero either ply bonuses or penalties to the dice, or he might choose 
botched it outright, succeeded in a way that was sin- to tweak the system to fit the immediate situation, but 
gularly unhelpful, or was foiled by some unexpected ultimately the dice are resolving the situation. This is 
outside influence. important for a sandbox game, because the dice are as 

Saving throws tell you whether or not your hero fair as they are merciless.
evades some immediate peril. If you need to know This fairness adds surprise and interest to a night’s 
whether or not the alien insect’s poison overwhelms gaming. Even the GM isn’t completely certain what’s 
you, or if you can dive away from the grenade before going to happen when the PCs forge ahead, and this 
it explodes, or if the villainous psychic’s mind-reading surprise and novelty help keep the GM interested in 
powers can pry out your secrets, you make a saving events, and not just a programmatic maestro for pre-
throw. The GM will tell you when you should be mak- set situations and outcomes. Every gaming session is 
ing one. a chance for something unexpected to boil out of a 

Combat rounds tell you whether or not your hero chance throw of the dice, whether that happens when 
has shot, stabbed, exploded, maimed, punched, or oth- the PCs catastrophically botch their attempt to defuse 
erwise ventilated their foe, and whether the foe has a nuclear fission bomb or when that alien warlord just 
managed to do the same to them. Combat in Stars happens to catch a ten-kilo demolitions charge with 
Without Number is very dangerous, especially to novice his chestplate. Even when cruel dice fell a heroic PC, 
adventurers and ordinary NPCs. One thug with a pistol that very degree of danger helps make the rest of the 
and a steady hand can kill most newly-minted heroes party’s survival more meaningful. They lived because 
with a single well-aimed bullet, and most normal men they made good choices and had a bare minimum of 
and women have even less of a chance against lethal luck, not because they were the designated heroes.
violence. Warrior heroes and others with a specific tal- Not all groups will want to play the game this way, 
ent for combat are more durable against these martial however, and that too is perfectly acceptable. Some 
perils, but even they have to respect the threat of a mob groups do want to let Fate weigh in on their side, and 
of angry spearmen or a sniper rifle’s crosshairs. let death and disaster have to get through a little more 

The combat section is a particularly important narrative armor first. A GM running a game like this 
read if your own gaming history has lent itself more can often produce this effect without the need for ex-
towards games that have very sturdy protagonists or plicitly changing die rolls or introducing destiny chips, 
narratively-shielded player characters. A first-level simply by deciding on gentler outcomes for failures, 
Warrior in Stars Without Number is lethally dangerous minimizing murder-obsessed enemies, and explicitly 
to an ordinary street thug or faceless enemy minion, arranging escape routes for overmatched PCs. This 
but three or four mooks with street-built slugthrowers game belongs to you and your group, and you should 
are likely to put that budding hero down hard. More run it the way you want it to be run.
experienced PCs gain a larger margin of safety as they 



46• Systems

Scenes and Durations

Many psychic abilities and other powers have durations ning’s play where most of the time isn’t tracked, only 
expressed in scenes. A scene is just a shorthand concept marking scenes for important negotiations, gunfire, or 
for a particular action sequence or exertion on the part time-critical feats of skill.
of the PCs. A single combat encounter is a scene, as is Some powers are limited to being used only so 
the infiltration of a building, the ascent of a radioactive many times in a given scene, or require Effort expen-
mountainside, or a tense meeting with an alien over- ditures that only come back at the end of the scene. 
lord’s cybernetic representative. Most scenes don’t last Outside of situations where close time-tracking is im-
for longer than fifteen minutes or a single contiguous portant, you can assume that these powers can be used 
chunk of action, but the maximum duration is up to or that the Effort comes back about once every fifteen 
the GM’s discretion. It’s quite possible to have an eve- minutes, assuming the PC has intervals for rest.

Saving Throws

There are times when misfortune or unpredictable per- Your character’s saving throw scores start at 15, 
il befalls a hero. Only luck or their own natural har- and decrease by one point each time you advance a 
diness can save them from disaster, and to do so they level. Each saving throw is modified by the best mod-
must make a saving throw. ifier of two different attributes: Physical by the better 

Saving throws come in three kinds. Physical saves of Strength or Constitution, Evasion by the better of 
relate to challenges of physical endurance such as poi- Dexterity or Intelligence, and Mental by the better of 
sons, diseases, radiation, or dire exhaustion. Evasion Charisma or Wisdom. Thus, a first-level PC with a 
saves involve dodging explosions, evading falling haz- Strength of 5 and a Constitution of 14 would have a 
ards, diving back from a crumbling surface, or other- Physical save of 14.
wise exerting one’s powers of speed and swift reaction. To make a save, roll 1d20 and try to equal or beat 
Mental saves relate most often to psychic influences, the appropriate saving throw score. On a success, you 
hallucinations, esoteric mental control technologies, evade or mitigate the peril, while on a failure it takes 
and other perils that assault a hero’s mind or percep- full effect. A natural roll of 1 is always a failure, and a 
tions. Mental saves can also be used when no other natural roll of 20 is always a success.
saving throw category seems to apply and only blind The GM decides when a saving throw is appropri-
luck and ineffable intuition can save the hero. ate. Some dangers might not allow one at all.

Poison and Peril

While cutting their way through the blue jungles +1 skill bonus to its own stealth roll. Unfortunately 
of Qinglin, a luxuriant blossom of cerulean crystal for the young heroes, it rolls a 12, approaching the 
catches Eden’s eye. The young adventuress is eager pair undetected.
to find something to make their reeking weeks in The GM rolls randomly to see which of the pair 
this azure Hell worthwhile for her and her brother is closest and finds that Randall is the unlucky win-
Randall, but she’s no fool, and promptly extends her ner. The dog-sized monstrosity leaps on the psychic 
3.048-meter probe pole to gently joggle the bloom and stabs him with its venomous proboscis.
from a safe distance away. The GM knows that the poison of this dread 

The two adventurers are so focused on their beast is enough to kill an unlucky victim in a matter 
examination of the flower that they risk missing the of minutes. But did Randall receive a lethal dose? He 
stealthy creep of a many-legged creature that ap- asks Randall’s player to make a Physical saving throw.
proaches through the undergrowth. The GM calls The psychic’s Physical saving throw target is 14, 
for Wis/Notice skill checks from both of the PCs. so his player reaches for a d20 and rolls, coming up 
Eden’s Wisdom modifier of +0 and lack of the Notice with a natural 20 on the dice. A natural 20 is always 
skill leave her with a -1 penalty. She rolls 2d6 and a success, even if penalties would otherwise make 
gets a 6. Her brother Randall has a Wisdom modifier the roll a failure.
of +1 and Notice-0 skill, which gives him a net +1 Randall staggers under the attack, but most of 
bonus on his roll, and a result of 11. the beast’s poison stains his armor harmlessly. He’s 

The GM decides that sneaking through the shaky, but can push through the dose he got with no 
undergrowth is a sort of thing that venomous alien ill effects. That’s a good thing, because that scuttler’s 
hunters would be good at, so he applies the creature’s egg-mate is hurrying up through the brush…



Skill Checckss •47 

Skill Checks

Most characters are skilled, competent men and wom-
en who are perfectly capable of carrying out the ordi- When To Call for a Check
nary duties of their role. Sometimes, however, they are Skill checks should only be called for challenges that fall 
faced with a situation or challenge beyond the usual outside the PC’s background and common experience. 
scope of their role and must make a skill check. A PC with the background of a starship pilot should 

To make a skill check, roll 2d6 and add the most not be rolling skill checks to land a ship or navigate to 
relevant skill level and attribute modifier. If the total is an in-system destination. As a general rule of thumb, 
equal or higher than the check’s difficulty, the check is a if failure at a particular task would make the PC seem 
success. On a failure, the PC either can’t accomplish the notably incompetent at their role in life, then they 
feat at all or they achieve it at the cost of some further shouldn’t have to roll a skill check for it. In addition, if 
complication to the situation. The GM determines the failure or success at a check really doesn’t matter in the 
specific outcome of a failure. game, if it won’t produce some interesting result either 

If the character doesn’t even have level-0 in the way, then a check shouldn’t be made.
pertinent skill, they suffer a -1 penalty to the roll. In Even concept-related feats might require a skill 
the case of particularly technical or esoteric skills they check, however, if the situation is especially bad or 
might not even be able to attempt the skill check at all. the circumstances particularly hostile. The pilot might 

Some checks might be suitable for more than have to make a Pilot skill check to land a ship if they 
one skill. A javelin-throwing contest might use Exert attempt it in the middle of a man-killing sandstorm, 
for being an athletic contest, or Shoot for involving a and a noble might have to make a Connect skill check 
ranged weapon, or Stab for using a muscle-powered to find shelter with an aristocratic relation if they’re 
thrown weapon. In such cases the PC can use the best currently wanted by the stellar tyrant’s guards.
applicable skill. In other situations, a skill might seem 
peripherally relevant; trying to find the hidden bomb Aiding a Skill Check
in a starship’s engine core before it detonates might cer- Sometimes one PC will want to lend a hand to another 
tainly use Notice or Fix, but a GM might also let Pilot as they attempt a difficult feat. To do this, the player 
be applied, as a veteran pilot might be expected to know first describes what sort of action they are taking to 
what their engine should look like. In such peripheral help their comrade. If the GM agrees that their effort 
cases, the check difficulty usually increases by 2. makes sense and would be helpful, the player then rolls 

a relevant skill check against the same difficulty as the 
Skill Check Difficulties original check. If it’s a success, the other PC gets a +1 

6 A relatively simple task that is still more than bonus on their roll. Multiple PCs can try to help, but 
the PC would usually be expected to manage the acting PC can’t earn more than a +1 total bonus.
in their regular background. Anything easier The helping skill doesn’t necessarily have to be the 
than this isn’t worth a skill check. same skill the PC is checking. If a player can think of 

a way to help a Sneak check with Talk, then so be it.
8 A significant challenge to a competent profes-

sional that they’d still succeed at more often Opposed Skill Checks
than not. Sometimes a PC wants to accomplish something that 

10 Something too difficult to be expected of another character wants to prevent. Sneaking past an 
anyone but a skilled expert, and even they alert guard, winning a shooting tournament, or besting 
might fail. an alien in a tentacle-wrestling competition might all 

be opposed skill checks.
12 Only a true master could expect to carry this In such cases, all participants roll their relevant 

off with any degree of reliability. skills and the highest score wins, with ties going to 
14+ Only a true master has any chance of achiev- the PC. To make the NPC’s roll, check their listed skill 

ing this at all, and even they will probably fail. bonus; they can add it to any skill check appropriate to 
their role or profession. If the NPC has no reason to 

Particularly helpful or hostile circumstances might be particularly good at the challenge, they simply roll 
give a bonus or penalty to the skill check. As a general 2d6 and add nothing.
rule, extremely bad circumstances or tools would ap- In most cases, the relevant skills are obvious. A 
ply up to a -2 penalty to the skill check, while a very character trying to skulk past a vigilant guard would be 
good situation or the perfect set of tools might give up rolling their Dex/Sneak against the guard’s roll, while 
to a +2 bonus to the roll. Usually, no combination of one trying to out-tentacle an alien would be rolling Str/
modifiers should add more than +2 or -2 to any given Exert. When in doubt, the GM decides which skill is 
skill check. most applicable.



48• Combat

Combat

Sometimes the only reasonable response to a situation 
involves drawn monoblades and heavy plasma fire. In Types of Actions
such unfortunate hours your heroes will have to en- When an actor’s turn comes up in the round, they may 
gage in combat. perform actions. Actions are divided into four different 

Combat in Stars Without Number is a lethal sort of types: Main Actions, Moves, On Turn actions, or Instant.

experience, especially for novice interstellar adventur-
ers. Even hardened Warriors can go down in a hurry Main Action One per Turn

under a withering hail of mag rifle fire or the scrap- Every actor can make one Main Action each round. 
steel knives of a hiveworld gang pack. PCs should be Main Actions are those deeds that are going to absorb 
very certain that the odds are in their favor before they most of the six-second round, such as attacking an en-
reach for their laser pistols, and even then, the gods of emy, bracing a door, applying first aid to a downed ally, 
battle can be cruel. digging a Stowed item out of a pack, manipulating a 

complex device, or some other activity that takes up 
Rounds and Initiative their focus. In place of their Main Action, an actor can 
Combat and other time-sensitive situations are divided take a second Move action.
up into rounds. Each round is approximately six sec-
onds, during which all participants may act. When ev- Move Action One per Turn

eryone has acted, the round ends and a new one begins. Every actor can make one Move action each round, 
To determine who acts first in a round, each par- running up to 10 meters. This movement assumes that 

ticipant rolls initiative. Each rolls 1d8 and adds their an actor is dodging enemies, paying attention to the 
Dexterity modifier. NPCs usually have no modifier. surroundings, navigating awkward terrain, and gener-
The participants then act in order, high roll to low, ally dealing with the hazards of a battlefield. Climbing 
with PCs winning ties. When everyone has had a turn a surface, swimming, or passing extremely rough ter-
to act, the sequence starts over again from the top. Ini- rain halves this movement rate. Actors can’t split their 
tiative is not re-rolled. Move action, such as taking part of it before using their 

Optionally, the GM may choose to use group ini- Main Action and the rest afterwards.
tiative instead in their campaigns. The PC with the best An actor who wants to disengage from an oppo-
Dexterity bonus rolls for the party, and the GM rolls nent in melee must use their Main Action to perform 
one die for the other NPCs. Members of the side that a Fighting Withdrawal, or else they suffer a free auto-
rolled highest may act first in whatever order they wish, matic melee attack from any foe engaged with them. 
and then the next-highest side acts. While easier to There is no need to spend a Main Action disengaging 
manage, it also increases the value of winning initiative, from enemies who are wielding only ranged weapons. 
and can leave the heroes in dire peril if a large group While it’s possible to use a rifle to buttstroke someone 
of foes wins the roll. or pistol-whip a near combatant, such weapons aren’t 

Sometimes a person is surprised or ambushed. as effectively threatening as true melee weapons.
Most ambushes involve a contested Dex/Sneak roll 
against a target’s Wis/Notice check, with the defender On Turn Action Any Amount on Your Turn

winning ties. In other cases the surprise may be prac- An On Turn action is some fast, simple act that could 
tically inevitable, such as a disguised assassin suddenly reasonably be performed while an actor is doing some-
lashing out with a monoblade in the middle of a society thing else. Dropping an object, falling prone, saying 
ball. Ambush targets who fail the contested roll are sur- something, drawing a Readied item, or activating a 
prised. A surprised target doesn’t get to roll initiative simple device might all be On Turn actions. A PC can 
until the second round of combat and can perform only perform as many On Turn actions as they want in a 
Instant actions while surprised. NPCs with roles rele- round, subject to the GM’s discretion.
vant to being vigilant or stealthy would gain their skill 
bonus to these checks, while others would simply roll Instant Action Any Amount, Any Time

an unmodified 2d6 for the opposed check. An Instant action is special, in that it can be performed 
Most PCs are not subject to surprise unless their even when it’s not the actor’s turn, or even after at-

guard is genuinely down at the moment of the ambush tacks or damage have already been rolled. Some psychic 
or attack. Someone walking in a dangerous part of a powers are Instant actions, allowing the actor to use 
city or picking their way through a seemingly-aban- them after they decide they don’t like how the dice have 
doned space station is unlikely to be astonished by the fallen. Certain combat actions are also Instant, though 
sudden appearance of danger, unless the attack is so they often cost the actor’s Main Action for the round as 
sudden and from such an unexpected quarter that even well. Any number of Instant actions can be performed 
their obvious caution is insufficient. during a round.



Combat •49 

Hitting an Enemy A successful attack inflicts hit point damage equal 
When an actor wants to hurt a target, they need to use to the weapon’s damage die plus the relevant attribute 
their Main Action to make an attack roll. An attack roll modifier. Thus, a hero with a +1 Dexterity modifier 
represents not just one shot or swing, but the assailant firing a laser pistol that does 1d6 damage would inflict 
spending their round trying to get in a good hit or a 1d6+1 hit points of damage on a hit. Skill levels do not 
clean shot at the target. add to damage unless it is a Punch attack.

To make an attack roll, the assailant rolls 1d20 and Some melee weapons apply Shock, and are guaran-
adds their attack bonus, their applicable skill level, and teed to do some degree of harm to a target. A weapon’s 
the attribute modifier most relevant to the weapon. Shock quality lists the number of points of damage it 
If the total is equal or higher than the target’s Armor inflicts on any target with an Armor Class equal or 
Class, the attack is successful. less than the one given. Thus, a primitive knife with a 

A PC’s attack bonus is usually equal to half their Shock score of “1 point/AC 15” would always do at least 
character level, rounded down. Characters with the 1 point of damage whenever its wielder attacks a target 
Warrior class or an Adventurer with the Partial War- with AC 15 or less, whether they hit or miss.
rior class option have higher base attack bonuses. NPCs Shock damage always adds the wielder’s attribute 
have their own attack bonus listed with their statistics, modifier and any other bonuses that might apply from 
which includes any modifiers they might have. weapon mods, foci, or other advanced tech. Some ad-

A PC’s skill level is their Punch, Stab, or Shoot vanced armor will always protect completely against 
skill in most cases, depending on what kind of weapon primitive weapons, however, and some advanced 
they’re using. In rare cases, a different skill might be weapons can ignore primitive gear, treating it as AC 10.
involved, such as Pilot for the guns of a light starfighter. A successful attack doesn’t always mean a direct 
If a PC doesn’t even have level-0 expertise in the type physical hit. A flurry of strokes that force an enemy 
of weapon they’re using, they suffer a -2 penalty on hit off-balance, graze him, frighten him, or exhaust him 
rolls for unfamiliarity with it. might all drain his hit points, bringing him closer to 

A PC’s attribute modifier depends on the weapon. defeat without actually inflicting real physical harm. 
For ranged weapons, this is usually Dexterity, while Only the last handful of hit points reflect serious bodily 
smaller melee weapons might use Strength or Dexter- damage. It’s up to the GM and player to decide how to 
ity, and large ones might rely on Strength alone. If a describe the effects of a successful hit.
weapon has more than one attribute listed, use the best.

Hit Roll Modifiers
Sometimes it can be easier or harder to connect with 
a blow depending on the combat situation. The table 
below offers some suggested hit roll modifiers for com-
mon combat circumstances. 

Circumstance Mod

Shooting at a distant prone foe -2

Shooting or meleeing an adjacent prone foe +2

Melee attacking while prone -4

The target is at least half behind cover -2

The target is almost completely in cover -4

Shooting from a prepared firing position +2

Finding cover is often critical in a gun battle. Gen-
erally, firing around a convenient corner or shooting 
over sandbags would qualify as half cover, while fir-
ing through slits or from carefully-prepared bunkers 
would allow for full cover. Melee attackers can usually 
ignore cover, as they get too close for their target to 
take proper advantage of it. Being prone doesn’t stack 
with hard cover, but sometimes the available cover is 
so low that the hero has to be flat to benefit from it.

A gunman who can set up a prepared firing po-
sition can get a significant advantage. Such a position 
usually requires at least five minutes of sighting and set-
ting up a rest. Most such positions provide some cover.



50• Combat

Common Actions in Combat

While a PC can do anything they might reasonably 
accomplish in six seconds as their Main Action for a Club Up a Weapon Move Action

round, some choices are more common than others. A combatant can shift their grip on a Readied rifle or 
Below are a list of some of the tactics or actions that pistol, using it as a crude melee weapon rather than a 
come up most often in combat. ranged weapon. Rifle-sized guns used this way count 

as a medium primitive weapon with no Shock score, 
Make a Melee Attack Main Action and pistol-sized guns count as a small primitive weap-

The combatant attacks an enemy within melee range, on with no Shock score. Rolling maximum damage on 
rolling a normal hit roll and inflicting damage on a a hit with such improvised weapons will break them. 
successful hit. Most melee attacks inflict Shock damage This action can also be taken to unclub a weapon and 
on a miss, if the target’s Armor Class is low enough, and ready it to shoot.
no successful hit does less damage than the weapon’s 
Shock would have done on a miss. An attacker’s weap- Run Move Action

on must be Readied in order to attack with it. The combatant moves their normal combat movement 
rate, which is 10 meters for most humans. If they’re 

Make a Ranged Attack Main Action climbing a surface, swimming, or navigating extremely 
The combatant fires or throws a Readied ranged weap- rough terrain, this movement rate is halved, and they 
on at a target. The combatant can’t Make a Ranged might have to make an Exert skill check to achieve even 
Attack with a two-handed weapon if there’s a enemy that. Prone characters crab along at half this rate.
armed with a melee weapon within melee range; it’s 
too easy for the assailant to bind up a rifle-sized gun. Fighting Withdrawal Main Action

One-handed ranged weapons and thrown weapons can The combatant disengages from any melee foes around 
still be used, albeit at a -4 penalty to hit. them. They don’t actually move away, but they can now 

get away from their assailants without giving them a 
Make a Snap Attack Instant Action free melee attack. Usually, this means the combatant 

A combatant with a Ready weapon can rush their attack, uses their Move action to get clear, because if they just 
sacrificing accuracy for speed. The combatant must still stand there the enemies might choose to re-engage 
have their Main Action impending or available. As an them the next round.
Instant, they can sacrifice it to Make a Melee Attack or 
Make a Ranged Attack against a foe in range, whether a Use a Skill Main Action

snap shot with a pistol or a quick thrust at an adjacent The combatant uses a skill that could be plausibly ap-
melee foe. This attack takes a -4 penalty to its hit roll. plied in a few seconds. An Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill 
If multiple combatants decide to make Snap Attacks at check to stabilize a wounded comrade is one such po-
the same time, they are resolved simultaneously. tential use, as is executing a pre-programmed hack, 

Snap Attacks are usually made only by the desper- shouting out a stirring rallying cry to timorous NPC 
ate, the undisciplined, or the elite, and the GM should allies, or anything else that might be done quickly.
rarely have NPCs employ them. Untrained hooligans 
might blaze away in excitement or panic, or a gunman Ready or Stow an Item Main Action
being charged by a howling spearman might risk a shot 
before he gets too close, but most combatants can’t af- The combatant draws a weapon, extracts an item from 
ford to take such a heavy penalty to their hit roll. Truly their backpack, digs a magazine out of a belt pouch, 
skilled combatants, however, can sometimes get away or otherwise moves an object around on their person. 
with such risks, particularly if they have a Warrior’s They can Ready an item this way or Stow it.
class ability to turn a miss into a hit. 

Reload a Weapon Main Action
Total Defense Instant Action The combatant swaps a Readied power cell or magazine 

As an Instant action, the combatant focuses on nothing into their weapon. Some very primitive firearms might 
other than avoiding knives, gunfire, hurled crystalline require more than one action to load them, while an 
spears, or other perils in the vicinity. Using Total De- archer can nock another arrow as a Move action.
fense costs the user their Main Action for the round, 
and cannot be used if they’ve already employed their Drop an Item Instant Action

Main Action. They become immune to Shock damage The combatant drops something they’re holding. They 
for the round from melee weapons, regardless of their can do this Instantly at any time to free up their hands.
Armor Class, and gain a +2 bonus to their Armor Class 
until their next turn.



Combat •51 

Pick up an Item Move Action Hold An Action Move Action

The combatant can scoop an object off the floor if they By choosing to Hold An Action, the combatant can delay 
have a free hand, leaving it Readied in their grip. taking the rest of their actions until later in the round, 

activating them as an Instant action. Thus, a hero who 
Stand Up Move Action wins initiative might use their Move action to Hold An 

The combatant gets up from a prone position. Most Action. Later in the round, as an enemy rushes around 
characters that have just been revived from uncon- a corner, he may Instantly elect to use his Main Action 
sciousness must get up before they do much else. to Make A Ranged Attack with his readied laser rifle. If 

acting in response to someone else’s impending action, 
Go Prone On Turn Action the held action is resolved first.

The combatant falls flat, forcing distant ranged attack-
ers to take a -2 penalty to hit them. Adjacent enemies 
find you an easier target, however, gaining +2 to hit.

Examples of Murder
Yaddle and Bort, two drunken hive thugs, get in- After a month of recovery, a cocky Bort has 
volved in an impromptu knife fight over a card equipped himself with a spiked walking stick, a me-
game. Yaddle wins the initiative roll, but Bort elects dium primitive weapon that is “more bashy” than his 
to make a Snap Attack, since Yaddle is within conve- small knife. He spots the young PC Warrior gun-
nient range of Bort’s Readied knife. Incensed, Yaddle slinger Eliza Darrick in the grimy hive street and 
also decides to make a Snap Attack, so the two re- covets her fine revolver. What better way to acquire 
solve their attacks simultaneously. it than to cosh the young woman?

Bort has a hit bonus of +1. Being an NPC, he He sidles into position near her before raising 
doesn’t add skills or attribute modifiers; he just rolls his stick. Eliza has a considerable fund of common 
1d20, adds 1 to it for his attack bonus, and applies a sense and is not subject to surprise at this turn of 

-4 penalty for a Snap Attack to find the Armor Class events, given the environment. Both roll initiative 
he hits. His modified roll is 11, which is enough to and Bort wins. He makes his roll of 1d20+1, no lon-
hit the unarmored Yaddle, who has an AC of 10. Bort ger rushed by a Snap Attack, and gets a 13.
rolls 1d4 for his small, primitive knife, inflicting 3 Eliza has an armored undersuit that grants her 
points of damage. Again, as an NPC, he doesn’t add an AC of 13, plus a bonus of +1 for her Dexterity 
attribute modifiers to the damage. modifier, for a total AC of 14. As Bort’s roll is lower, 

Yaddle has a similar hit bonus, but his modified he misses. Because medium primitive weapons only 
roll is 7, less than Bort’s unarmored AC of 10, so he do Shock to targets with AC of 13 or less, Bort’s stick 
misses. His primitive knife does do 1 point of Shock doesn’t even do Shock damage to her.
damage to Bort, however, because a small primitive Eliza then draws the Readied revolver that Bort 
weapon does its Shock damage to any target with an so coveted and makes her own attack roll of 1d20, +1 
AC of 15 or less. for her attack bonus, +1 more for her Dexterity, and 

With the attacks resolved simultaneously, both +1 more for her Shoot-1 skill. She rolls a total of 4, 
now take damage. Yaddle takes 3 points, and as he an abysmal showing. As she does not much care for 
only had 3 hit points to begin with, he’s down and being jumped by the likes of Bort, she chooses to use 
dying, spurting from several vicious slashes. Bort her Warrior class ability to turn a missed shot into a 
takes 1 damage from Shock, and since he was always hit once per scene, sealing Bort’s doom.
a frail gutter rat with only 1 hit point, he too is down, With only 1 hit point, it doesn’t even matter 
slipping into shock from a gash in his belly. Luckily, what Eliza might roll for damage. The GM describes 
he owes an onlooker money, so his creditor rushes the look of dull surprise on Bort’s face as Eliza’s bullet 
forward and tries to hold Bort’s guts in with his coat. plows a wet hole through his chest.

Stabilizing a mortally wounded target requires Eliza ducks down a side street as Bort falls to the 
an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check. The creditor filthy asphalt. Even if the GM decided that Bort had 
is an NPC, and the GM decides that they have no a chance to survive his wound, none of the denizens 
particular talent at first aid, so the GM rolls a flat 2d6 around him have any interest in anything but the 
for them and gets a lucky 10. That’s just enough to contents of his pockets. Bort gurgles out the last of 
stabilize Bort even without the help of proper med- his life six rounds later, giving fodder for bad dreams 
ical supplies, and so the downed victor is carried off to the scarred urchin who is tugging the stick from 
to a an unlicensed street doc for emergency patching. his slackening grip.



52• Combat

Combat Complications and Maneuvers

Players generally seek to wring out every possible ad-
vantage in a combat, and that means they’ll often try Execution Attacks
unusual maneuvers or add special complications to a Occasionally an assailant will have the chance to per-
fight. The situations that follow are just some of the fectly set up a shot against an entirely unsuspecting tar-
more common circumstances a GM will encounter. get. Such surprise attacks can be devastatingly effective, 

and are capable of summarily executing almost anyone.
Forcing Enemy Movement Setting up a killing blow this way requires a full 
Sometimes the PC will want to shove an enemy into minute of preparation, whether as a sniper drawing 
a firepit, force a foe into an open reactor core spark, a bead on a target or an assassin drifting closer to an 
dump an alien chamberpot on their head, or swing unsuspecting politico. Any focused attention on the 
from the balcony down upon an evildoer. Sometimes assailant will spoil this preparation, as will any action 
these gambits will simply work, while other times a that alarms the target. Assassins intending a melee at-
skill check might be required. tack must be using an adequately lethal weapon, such as 

To shove, herd, or otherwise manipulate a foe, the a knife rather than a fist or bludgeon. PCs with special 
attacker has to hit them with a Punch attack, doing talents in unarmed combat or murderous blunt weapon 
no damage, and then win an opposed Punch or Exert use might be exempt from this at the GM’s discretion.
skill check. If they win, the opponent gets moved up Once the preparation is complete, a sniper may 
to three meters in the direction the PC wishes or is shoot or an assassin may attack an adjacent target. The 
knocked prone. Herding a foe with a melee weapon target’s Armor Class is irrelevant, assuming the weap-
may also be possible at the GM’s discretion, allowing a on being used isn’t too primitive to penetrate high-tech 
Stab skill check instead of Punch. armor. Hitting with a sniper shot is a Dex/Shoot skill 

When environmental damage is needed for a fire- check, with a difficulty of 6 for a point-blank shot, 8 for 
pit, dropped object, or inconvenient wall spike, 1d8 is one at the weapon’s normal range, and 10 for a shot at 
usually a good choice, with potential ongoing damage extreme range. A melee attack always hits, but the as-
if the victim doesn’t get out. Major foes can handle a sassin must be adjacent to the target, and cannot move 
lot of such accidents, while ordinary men and women to close on the same round. They must be adjacent and 
might well be taken out of the fight by them. unsuspected at the start of the round.

If the attack hits, it does maximum damage and 
Disarming a Foe the victim must immediately make a Physical saving 
Wresting a weapon from a hostile wielder is a difficult throw at a penalty equal to the attacker’s combat skill 
feat under the best of circumstances. Still, sometimes or they will be mortally wounded on the spot. Some 
a PC will want to strip their foe of something sharp victims might merely be incapacitated instead if such 
or shooty. an outcome was intended and plausible.

Normally it is only possible to disarm a foe when Attacking a completely helpless adjacent opponent, 
engaging them in melee combat. Shooting the weapon such as one who is unconscious, asleep, thoroughly 
out of an enemy’s hand is a popular holovid trope, but it bound, or otherwise incapable of self-defense does not 
tends to be less practical on the actual battlefield. require a hit roll and will leave them mortally wounded.

To execute a disarm, the assailant must choose to Player characters are as vulnerable to these rules as 
spend their Main Action doing so and make a successful NPCs are, and may be sniped or stabbed if they behave 
attack roll. If they hit, they do no damage; instead, both in sufficiently incautious fashion.
they and their targets make Dex or Strength-modified 
skill checks with the weapons they’re using, with the Two-Weapon Fighting
defender gaining a +3 bonus on the roll. If the attacker Some players enjoy having their heroes employ two 
wins the opposed check, the enemy is disarmed. On a weapons at once in combat, whether they’re a pair of 
tie, both are disarmed. knives, a brace of laser pistols, or some other plausible 

Disarmed weapons skitter 1d4 meters away in a pairing of weapons.
random direction. If the attacker beats the defender by Dual-wielding requires at least level-1 skill in 
at least three points on the opposed check, they end Shoot or Stab depending on the weapons used. Novices 
up in control of the weapon if they have a free hand. cannot effectively dual-wield.

Thus, if a bare-handed assailant tried to rip the gun A hero who dual-wields suffers a -1 penalty on 
out of the hands of an enemy alien, the assailant would hit rolls due to the extra complication, but gains a +2 
need to hit with a Punch attack and then roll either Str/ bonus on damage rolls on a successful hit. This bonus 
Punch or Dex/Punch against the alien’s skill check + 3. doesn’t add to Shock. Only one weapon can be used to 
If they won, they’d send the gun flying, and if they won attack in any given round, though either can be used.
by 3 or more points, they’d end up holding it. Unarmed combatants cannot dual-wield.



Injury, Death, and Healing •53 

Injury, Death, and Healing

A creature brought to zero hit points has been defeated re-attempted next round if the target isn’t dead yet, but 
and can no longer fight. If brought to zero hit points by Lazarus patches are expended even on a failure. The 
a lethal weapon, they are dead or dying. Foes brought Biopsionic technique Psychic Succor automatically suc-
down with fists, blunt objects, or other less-than-lethal ceeds in stabilizing a target, if any time remains to them.
means may merely be unconscious or incapacitated, if A critically-injured target who has been stabilized 
their assailant wasn’t trying to kill them. Some enemies regains one hit point after ten minutes of recovery. 
might even be incapacitated by purely mental or emo- They are able to move and function normally if they are 
tional strain. Foes defeated non-lethally recover one fiercely determined to do so, but any further damage 
hit point after ten minutes and then function normally. whatsoever will kill them, with no chance for stabili-

A mortally-wounded creature at zero hit points zation. If they are healed with some high-tech pharma-
will die in no more than six rounds. They may be un- ceutical stim or advanced Biopsionic technique, they 
conscious, screaming for their mother, trying to press can shake off this fragility and return to action with 
vital organs back into place, or begging for mercy, but whatever hit points the drug or power have provided. 
they can perform no useful action and their fate is sealed Without such advanced healing, a critically-wounded 
if no immediate aid is provided. Creatures dropped by target requires at least a week of bed rest and medical 
Heavy weapons, explosives, or other dramatic injury care before they can shake off their fragility and start 
may be instantly killed at the GM’s discretion. Addi- regaining their level in hit points after each night’s rest.
tional damage inflicted on a mortally-wounded target This assumes that TL4 medical care is available. If 
will always kill them immediately. only TL3 tech is on hand, the recovery time is a month. 

A PC who wants to extend mercy to an enemy or If TL2 or lower medical care is provided, the recovery 
aid to a friend can use their Main Action to attempt time is a month, and the target must make a Physical 
an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check, using whatever saving throw at the end of it, with a bonus equal to the 
modifier is best. If they have no special medical tools Heal skill of whoever is tending them. On a success, 
available at all, the difficulty of the check is 10 plus they’ll recover within 1d4 more weeks. On a failure, 
the number of rounds that have passed since the target the primitive technology ensures they’ll die of their 
went down. If they have a medical kit or other proper wounds at some point in that time.
trauma tools, the difficulty is 8 plus the rounds since Creatures that have suffered damage but have not 
injury, and if they expend a Lazarus patch on the target, been mortally injured regain hit points equal to their 
the difficulty is 6 plus the time. A failed check can be hit dice or character level after each night of good rest.

Desperate Measures
Eliza Darrick is in a bad situation. During the ex- Unfortunately, since Eliza has been bleeding out 
ploration of a lost Mandate research station, an ally for one full round, the difficulty of stabilizing her is 
managed to accidentally activate the installation’s 7. The patch fails. Big John has another one in his 
defense systems. A swarm of decaying security bots pack, but it’s going to take him his next round’s Main 
almost overwhelmed the group, and a chance shot Action to dig it out and then another round to try to 
from an integral mag rifle has just dropped Eliza. apply it, by which time Eliza will have been bleeding 

The gunslinger is on the floor with zero hit for three rounds and the difficulty will be 9.
points. If she were an NPC, the shot probably would The next round, a shout from across the room 
have just killed her outright, but as a PC, she has alerts Big John that an ally is throwing him some-
the hardihood to keep struggling against any wound thing. A stim unit comes skittering across the floor, 
a human could theoretically survive. Even so, she’s and Big John uses a Move action to scoop it up, leav-
going to die in six rounds if nobody comes to her aid. ing it Readied in his grip. It’s an ancient Mandate cos-

Big John, an ally of the downed shootist, spends metic stim they looted from the station’s commissary, 
his Main Action dragging her behind cover as the and it might just save Eliza’s life.
rest of the party tries to hold back the metal tide. By Big John presses the stim capsule against Eliza’s 
the time he actually gets the chance to try to stabilize neck and the mysterious pretech nanites do their 
her, a full round has passed since she was felled. work, giving her minty-fresh breath for the next six 

Luckily, Big John has a lazarus patch Readied at months. As a side effect, the medical substrate of the 
his belt. Unluckily, he has no medical skill whatsoev- Mandate stim also heals 1d6 damage to her, raising 
er, though he’s quite intelligent, with a +1 attribute her to five hit points. Eliza is now prone but fully 
modifier. He rolls 2d6, -1 for his lack of Heal skill, +1 revived. Thanks to the advanced healing, she does 
for his Intelligence modifier, for a total of 6. not need further rest before returning to action.



54• Hacking

Hacking

In the far future, it’s inevitable that many advanced civ- control for 1d4 rounds plus their Program skill before 
ilizations will use computers to control their vehicles, the system detects the intrusion and locks them out. 
infrastructure, and data stores. It is equally inevitable The hacker can attempt to regain control, but further 
that some tech-talented hero will try to use that fact hacking attempts become more difficult.
to get something they want. While hacking has some If they fail, they must immediately make a second 
significant limitations in what it can accomplish, it can skill check at the same difficulty. On a success, they 
still be a useful tool for the right kind of hero. avoid an immediate alarm and a trace of their hacking 

location. On a failure, the system has been alerted to 
The Digital Environment their intrusion attempt and has informed its human 
Most planets with TL4 or better will rely on computers overseers of the hacker’s location. Depending on the 
to operate their infrastructure and maintain their data. nature of the system being hacked, the response may 
They may or may not have an internet-like global net- range from an annoyed data janitor shutting down the 
work depending on their political situation and cultural compromised terminal after he’s done eating lunch to 
values, but individual buildings or data storehouses will a fast-response special weapons team busting through 
normally have an internal network. If there is no open the windows ninety seconds later.
planetary internet, a hacker will need to be physically Hacking the same system in a short period of time 
present in the networked area to hack the system. is progressively more difficult, as the system’s alerts and 

Most hacking requires a physical interface with security measures are increasingly active. Whether or 
the system, either through tapping a data line with a not prior attempts were successful, an additional +1 
metatool or plugging into a connected terminal. Tap- difficulty penalty is added for every hack attempted in 
ping a data line usually takes at least a minute unless a the system after the first within 24 hours.
special cable-siphon tool is used, while plugging into 
a terminal is a Main Action. Some buildings may have Line Shunts
a local wireless network that can be used as an entry Some well-guarded or high-security computer systems 
point, and some planetary internets may allow assaults require more than a simple hack to obtain data or sub-
on arbitrary computers, but such convenient situations vert their functionality. These systems have multiple 
are unusual. Advanced security software usually makes security redundancies and consensus-based backup 
such remote assaults impractically difficult. processors that make it all but impossible to execute a 

It’s up to the GM to decide what parts of a facility hack from a single point. To overcome these systems 
are susceptible to hacking, and to determine the full or to execute exceptionally long-lived hacks, the hacker 
scope of what effects a hacker can produce. A high- must place one or more line shunts at other locations.
tech security door in some advanced facility might well A line shunt is a TL4 piece of black-market tech 
be hackable, but every refrigerator, locked closet door, designed to tap into a data line and spoof the contents 
and employee bathroom is not necessarily slaved to the in concert with a hacking attempt.
local network. Professional, well-maintained computer systems 

usually require one line shunt to be applied before any 
Executing the Hack hack can be performed. Government or infotech-fo-
Assuming a hacker is able to make a connection, they cused corporation buildings usually need two. Black 
can make an Int/Program skill check to hack the system. sites or extremely well-guarded systems need three.
If they’ve spent at least an hour planning this specific Once a sufficient number of line shunts are ap-
hack, the skill check requires only a Main Action to plied, any ensuing hacks last until the shunts are dis-
execute their prepared code. If they’re performing the turbed. Thus, if a hacker placed the shunts and then 
hack off-the-cuff, it takes ten minutes. If they’re rushed Subverted a System, their control would last as long as 
and don’t have time to either prepare the hack or spend the shunts remained in place. The likelihood of a shunt 
ten minutes dueling with security systems, they can being found will depend on how accessible the location 
speed it up into a single Main Action at an additional is, how active the guardians are, and how obvious the 
difficulty penalty. hacking attempt is.

The difficulty of the roll depends on the kind of Line shunts must usually be placed at specific loca-
information or influence they want to get out of the tions in a structure or building in order to tap the right 
system, adjusted by the quality of the security system lines, depending on the goal of the hacker. If the hacker 
and any rush on the hacker’s part. On a success, they doesn’t have a map of the site’s network architecture, 
get what they want. If what they want is data, the in- they can find the necessary sites with the Answer a Spe-

formation is downloaded instantly. If what they want cific Question hack. This basic data probe doesn’t require 
is control over an automated system such as a factory a line shunt, even if other hacks on the system would 
control computer or a security system, they maintain need them to be placed.



Hacking •55 

Data Protocols Example Hacking Actions
It’s assumed that a competent PC with the Program These are some of the usual actions taken by a hacker. 
skill is familiar with the common data formats and A GM can extrapolate others as the situation requires.
computing systems of their home sector. They will be 
aware of the security measures and technical specifica- Answer a Specific Question (Difficulty 8): Get a specific 
tions of worlds that are in common contact with each fact or piece of information from the system. Find 
other. Sometimes, however, the hacker is faced with a a person’s home address, find a path to a desired 
completely foreign system, or one built along unknown destination in a building, locate active security 
alien lines. In these cases they will need to have the cameras, pull criminal records on a person, or 
data protocols for the system before they can make an some other direct query. 
effective hacking attempt. Get General Information (Difficulty 10): Pull all avail-

Assuming the protocols aren’t restricted informa- able information on a particular topic from the 
tion, the hacker can drop a few credits on local tech system. Get a full map of a site, get all information 
manuals and practice for a month minus one week per about security systems, pull a subject’s complete 
level of Program skill, down to a one-day minimum. personnel file from a corporate database, acquire 
At the end of that period, they’ll master the protocols. all files related to a secret project, or some other 

If manuals aren’t widely available, one option is to exhaustive data dump on a single specific topic.
find a local hacker willing to share their information. Complete Database Acquisition (Difficulty 12): Copy 
The difficulty of this is up to the GM; it might require an entire database to another computer or data 
nothing more than a Connect skill check, or it may re- storage unit. A single database might be a cor-
quire a full-fledged adventure to find someone willing poration’s personnel records, the records of a 
to stick their neck out for foreigners who are clearly particular police precinct, the full database of a 
going to cause trouble with their newfound knowledge. complex technical project, a starship’s operations 
Prices range from 1,000 credits for worlds with restrict- record and system log, or another entire corpus of 
ed but not carefully-policed data, to prices of 10,000 data. The database must be entirely present in the 
and up for worlds with more draconian data controls. local system and any significant database requires 

Another option is to obtain a well-secured local at least an hour to decrypt and download, thus 
computer and simply experiment on it. Of course, lo- necessitating the use of at least one line shunt. The 
cal hardware with up-to-date security measures of a hacker must either have an adequate data storage 
breadth and sophistication sufficient to teach a hacker unit, a landline connection to another computer 
is likely to be either very expensive on the black market or a wireless connection to a remote server. 
or require a “collection expedition” by the party. Suppress a System (Difficulty 8): Shut down a particu-

lar automated system connected to this network. 
Common Hacking Actions Difficulty Cameras stop recording, sensors stop sensing, 

open powered doors won’t close, and automated 
Answer a Specific Question 8 gun turrets won’t fire. The hacker can affect sev-
Get General Information 10 eral individual sensors or systems, but only of the 
Complete Database Acquisition 12 same type. Thus, they could shut down an electri-
Suppress a System 8 fied fence for the duration of the hack, but they’d 

have to make a second hack to deactivate the cam-
Subvert a System 10 eras. When the hack ends, the system will resume 
Sabotage a System 10 operation without registering the interruption.

Subvert a System (Difficulty 10): Much as suppressing 
Hacking Circumstances Modifier a system, except that the hacker can control its 

operation within the device’s normal parameters. 
Human overseers are alarmed +1 They can upload fake input to a sensor system, fire 
Rushed work for an unplanned hack +2 automated defenses, or open sealed vault doors. 
Each hack after the first per 24 hours +1 The hacker can control the system each round by 
Especially sensitive system +1 using a Main Action to do so; if uncontrolled, the 

system simply repeats or maintains its last state.
Sabotage a System (Difficulty 10): The hacker complete-

Types of Systems Modifier ly fries a specific system, either causing it to phys-
Ordinary personal system -1 ically self-destruct or jamming it with malignant 
Small business system/savvy personal +0 code. Unlike most hacks performed without link 

shunts, this damage is permanent until the owners 
Minor gov/major corporation +1 repair the broken hardware, a process that usually 
Major government/megacorp +2 requires several hours. Sabotage always triggers 

immediate alerts to any human overseers.



56• Advancement

Character Advancement

When characters accumulate enough experience points, 
they advance a character level. New PCs start out at lev- Benefits of Gaining a Level
el one and the most experienced, capable heroes in the Once a PC has been awarded enough experience points 
sector might reach level ten. Advancing beyond level to reach the next level, they immediately gain the ben-
ten is usually prohibitively difficult, though possible at efits of advancement. No special training or practice 
the GM’s discretion. is required as their abilities are assumed to have been 

honed by their past adventures.
Gaining Experience Points
To advance in capability, PCs need to earn experience Roll Additional Hit Points
points. Once they accumulate enough experience, they First, they become harder to overcome in combat. To 
can advance to the next character level, representing determine their new maximum hit points, they roll a 
the sharpening of their skills and the heroic veterancy number of six-sided dice equal to their new level, add-
that comes of surviving perils and dire challenges. ing their Constitution modifier to each one. A nega-

There are many different things that can earn a tive modifier can’t lower a die’s result below 1. If the 
hero experience points, and the kind of activities and total is greater than their current hit points, they take 
goals that reward them will vary with the kind of cam- this new total. Otherwise, their current maximum hit 
paign you’re playing. The GM should make clear to the points increase by one.
whole group what kind of things earn the PCs experi- Thus, if a character with a Constitution score of 
ence in their game. 14 and four hit points reached second level, they’d roll 

For some games, success might lie in plundering 2d6+2. If the total was five or greater, they’d keep it. 
alien hoards or clawing wealth from the hands of des- If they managed to roll snake eyes and get only a four, 
perate patrons. Other games might reward the PCs they’d still increase their maximum hit points to five. 
for achieving personal goals, whether or not there Warriors and Adventurers with the Partial War-
was any money in it. Some might even award XP only rior class option get a further two hit points each time 
for spending credits, requiring every PC to recklessly they advance a level. Thus, a third level Warrior would 
waste their wealth before gaining a level. It’s up to the roll 3d6+6 for their hit point total, plus three times 
GM to pick a method that fits the group’s tastes. their Constitution modifier.

The table below indicates how many experience 
points need to be earned before a PC can advance to Improve Attack Bonus
that level. Once the requisite number of XP are earned, A PC’s base attack bonus becomes equal to half their 
the hero gains their new level and all the benefits. new character level, rounded down. Warriors may 

Note that this table makes for a relatively fast instead use their full character level for the bonus. Ad-
progression through the early levels of an adventur- venturers with the Partial Warrior class option may 
er’s career, before slowing drastically at higher levels. add a cumulative +1 to their attack bonus at levels one 
A group that prefers a different pacing might alter the and five, thus having a total +1 attack bonus at level 
chart to suit their own tastes. one and +4 at level five.

In general, you can assume that one “successful” 
gaming session should usually earn you about 3 XP. Improve Saving Throws

The PC becomes more capable of evading chance 
harms and perils. Their saving throw scores decrease 

Character Level Total Experience Required
by one, making it easier to succeed on saving throws 

1 0 by rolling equal or over it. As a first level character has 
2 3 saving throw scores of 15, reaching second level would 
3 6 lower them to 14, modified by attributes.

4 12
5 18
6 27
7 39
8 54
9 72
10 93
11+ +24 points for each level more



Advancement •57 

Gain and Spend Skill Points Purchase Improved Attributes
They become more capable with their skills. A PC gains A veteran adventurer may have trained or honed their 
three skill points they can spend on improving their natural abilities well enough to improve one of their 
skills or save to spend later. Experts and Adventurers six base attributes. While even the most determined 
with the Partial Expert class option gain an extra bonus development isn’t enough to turn complete ineptitude 
point to spend on a non-combat, non-psychic skill. into gifted competence, a hard-working adventurer can 

If the PC is a Psychic or Partial Psychic, they must hone their existing strengths considerably.
spend at least one of these points on improving psychic The first time a PC improves an attribute, it costs 
skills or gaining new psychic techniques. They can save 1 skill point and adds +1 to an attribute of their choice. 
these points to spend later if they wish, but they cannot The second improvement to their attributes costs 2 
spend them on more mundane talents. Restricted psy- skill points, the third 3, and so forth. Each improve-
chics can only ever improve or learn techniques from ment adds +1 to the attribute, potentially improving 
the psychic discipline they selected when they picked its modifier.
the Psychic primary focus. Unrestricted psychics can PCs must be a certain level before purchasing the 
improve or learn any discipline. PCs with the Psychic third, fourth, or fifth attribute boost. No more than five 
character class are all unrestricted, while Partial Psychic attribute boosts can ever be purchased by a PC.
Adventurers are restricted in their talents.

Skills that are gained or improved immediately on Attribute Skill Point Minimum

gaining a level are assumed to have been perfected over Boost Cost Character Level

the past level and require no training time or teaching. First 1 1
If you save your skill points to spend them later then Second 2 1
you’ll need to find some teacher or other explanation 

Third 3 3
for developing them. It doesn’t take more than a week 
to refine your new ability, but you can’t usually spend Fourth 4 6
your points mid-scene to develop a heretofore-unmen- Final 5 9
tioned expertise with flamethrowers.

The cost for improving a skill is listed below. Ev- Choose New Foci
ery skill level must be purchased in order; to gain lev- Finally, the PC might be eligible to pick an additional 
el-1 in a skill you need to pay one point for level-0 and level in a focus. At levels 2, 5, 7, and 10 a PC can add 
then two points for level-1. A PC must be the requi- a level to an existing focus or pick up the first level in 
site minimum level to increase a skill to certain levels. a new focus.
Less hardened heroes simply don’t have the focus and If this is the first level they’ve taken in the focus, 
real-life experience to attain such a pitch of mastery. they might be granted a skill as a free bonus pick, de-

A PC cannot develop skills beyond level-4. pending on the focus’ benefits. During character cre-
ation, this bonus skill pick is treated like any other skill 

New Skill Skill Point Minimum pick. If the focus is taken as part of advancement, how-
Level Cost Character Level ever, it instead counts as three skill points spent toward 

0 1 1 increasing the skill. This is enough to raise a nonexis-
1 2 1 tent skill to level-1, or boost a level-1 skill to level-2. 
2 3 3 They may do this even if they aren’t high-enough level 

to normally qualify for a skill level that high.
3 4 6 If the skill points aren’t quite enough to raise the 
4 5 9 skill to a new level, they remain as credit toward future 

advances. If applied to a skill that is already at level-4, 
Psychic Effort and Techniques the PC can spend the three skill points on any other 
When a Psychic gains a new level in a psychic skill, they skill of their choice.
can immediately pick a technique from that discipline 
of equal or lesser level. They can’t save this pick; they 
must choose it as soon as they gain the new skill level.

Psychics can also spend their skill points to master 
additional psychic techniques. The cost of this educa-
tion is equal to the technique’s minimum skill level re-
quirement. Thus, to master the Biopsionic technique 
Metamorph would cost three skill points, because Meta-

morph requires Biopsionics-3 skill to learn. 
A Psychic’s maximum Effort is equal to 1 plus their 

highest psychic skill, plus the best of their Wisdom or 
Constitution modifiers.



58• Environmental Hazards

Environmental Hazards

Falling Radiation
PCs who plunge off elevated surfaces suffer 1d6 damage Radiation is a slow killer in small doses, and a quick end 
for every three full meters fallen under standard-gravi- in larger ones. Targets exposed to dangerous amounts 
ty conditions. of radiation must make a Physical saving throw at in-

tervals depending on the strength of the glow. Mildly 
Poisons dangerous zones might force a save once per day or 
Those afflicted with some insidious venom can usually once per hour, up to lethal rad zones that force mul-
make a Physical saving throw to resist the worst of the tiple saves per round. Vacc suits and other forms of 
effects. Natural venoms usually require 1d6 rounds to protection can effectively shield a wearer from weaker 
apply their effect, while special or engineered toxins sources of radiation.
take effect instantly. Poison effects may include uncon- Each failed saving throw lowers the target’s Con-
sciousness, hit point damage, hallucinations, or death. stitution score by one point. If the new score decreas-

Even in the latter case, however, swift application es a hero’s Constitution modifier, they lose any excess 
of the appropriate Biopsionic techniques or success at maximum hit points their former modifier granted. 
an Int/Heal check can negate the effect of the poison. Characters reduced below half their original Consti-
The difficulty for this check varies with the potency of tution score will die in 1d6 weeks from radiation poi-
the poison and assumes that the PC medic has access soning; those reduced below a Constitution score of 3 
to a TL4 medkit. Most natural poisons are difficulty will die instantly. Radiation poisoning that does not 
8, while synthetic toxins are difficulty 10 or greater. immediately kill a victim can induce vomiting, head-
Only one attempt can be made to neutralize a poison. aches, soft tissue bleeding and dizziness, but a resolute 
Use of a specific antivenin is always successful if such victim can continue functioning more-or-less normally 
a resource is available. until death. A target killed by radiation poisoning can-

Drugged or damaged PCs are instantly restored by not be revived by Psychic Succor or other stabilization 
successful treatment. Those who have been killed by a techniques.
poison revive with one hit point as if recovering from a Someone who has suffered a fatal dose of radiation 
mortal wound, assuming the antidote is applied within poisoning can only be saved by treatment at a TL4 hos-
six rounds of the victim’s succumbing. pital or ship’s sick bay, recovering the lost Constitution 

at a rate of one point per week. Non-fatal doses can 
Diseases be treated by a TL4 medkit and an Int/Heal check at 
Hideous interstellar plagues are an occupational hazard difficulty 10. Each success restores one lost point of 
of adventurers, though exposure to a pathogen usually Constitution and a check can be made once per day.
permits a Physical saving throw to resist its effects. If 
failed, the PC is infected, and will suffer progressive- Hard Vacuum
ly-worse symptoms until the disease runs its course or PCs sometimes encounter the icy void of space more 
the PC dies. intimately than they would prefer. Actual death from 

Most sicknesses will simply apply penalties to vacuum exposure may take a little while, but incapaci-
skill checks or hit rolls, or reduce a PC’s maximum hit tation is rapid for most victims. A PC exposed to hard 
points, or otherwise debilitate the character. A few may vacuum may continue acting normally for a number of 
require one or more additional saving throws to be rounds equal to one plus their Constitution modifier. 
made at specific intervals in order to avoid eventual Each round thereafter, they suffer 1d20 damage and 
death, or be a certain doom to those unlucky enough must make a Physical save to keep conscious, assuming 
to be afflicted with it. the damage hasn’t felled them.

As with poisons, Biopsionic techniques or Int/Heal 
medical attention can cure a sickness. Assuming TL4 
medical supplies, ordinary diseases are usually difficulty 
8, while more virulent strains are difficulty 10 or more. 
One attempt can be made to cure a disease per week, 
and success usually clears up any symptoms rapidly.



System Quick Reference Sheet

Skill Checks The Combat Sequence
Roll 2d6 and add the character’s most relevant attribute modi- Combat is divided into rounds of six seconds. Every participant 
fier and skill. Sometimes more than one skill might apply; the gets a turn, and then the sequence starts over again.
PC can choose which to roll. If the roll is equal or higher than First, every participant rolls initiative, rolling 1d8 plus 
the check difficulty, the PC succeeds. If less, then they either fail their Dexterity modifier, if they have one. Participants act in 
outright, attain only partial success, or suffer an unanticipated order, highest to lowest, with PCs winning ties with NPCs.
turn of events at the GM’s discretion. On their turn, a combatant can take one Main Action, one 

For opposed skill checks, both participants roll and the Move, and as many On Turn actions as is plausible. A combat-
higher roll wins. For NPCs, assume they have a +0 bonus unless ant can take Instant actions at any time, even when it’s not their 
the activity is one they’d reasonably be good at. In that case, they turn, or even if dice have already been rolled.
can apply their listed skill bonus to the check.

Acting In Combat
Skill Check Difficulties You can use a Main Action to attack an enemy, disengage from 

6 A relatively simple task that is still more than the PC a melee, use a skill, reload a gun, produce a Stowed item, take a 
would usually be expected to manage in their regular second Move action, or do anything else you could accomplish 
background. Anything easier than this isn’t worth a in six seconds.
skill check. You can use a Move action to stand up from prone, club 

up a ranged weapon, or move 10 meters. Your movement is 
8 A significant challenge to a competent professional half that if you’re climbing, swimming, or otherwise navigating 

that they’d still succeed at more often than not. rough terrain. You can’t split a Move action around your Main 
10 Something too difficult to be expected of anyone but Action. You have to move all at once. If you move away from a 

a skilled expert, and even they might fail. melee combatant without spending a Main Action to disengage 
12 Only a true master could expect to carry this off with from the fray, all adjacent melee attackers get a free attack at you.

any degree of reliability. You can use an On Turn action to fall prone, say something, 
drop an object, or do anything else that’s very simple to do and 

14+ Only a true master has any chance of achieving this at takes almost no time or attention.
all, and even they will probably fail. You can use an Instant action at any time to trigger certain 

special powers. You can also use it to make a Snap Attack with 
Saving Throws a weapon or go totally defensive, though both of the latter will 
To make a saving throw, a victim rolls 1d20 and tries to equal cost you your Main Action for the round, and can’t be done if 
or exceed their relevant saving throw score. Target Physical you’ve already used your Main Action.
saves for poisons, diseases, and exhaustion, Evasion saves for 
diving for cover or leaping back from peril, and Mental saves Hitting in Combat
for resisting psychic powers. NPCs have a saving throw score To hit a target, the attacker rolls 1d20 and adds their attack 
of 15 minus half their hit dice, rounded down. bonus, the relevant combat skill, and the attribute modifier 

relevant to their weapon. Weapons with more than one listed 
Injury and Healing attribute allow the PC to use either. If the PC lacks the relevant 
A target reduced to zero hit points by a lethal attack is mortally combat skill entirely, they take a -2 penalty to hit. If the roll is 
wounded. One dropped by non-lethal assaults is unconscious. equal or greater than the target’s Armor Class, the attack is a hit.

Dying victims can take no actions and will die soon with- On a hit, the attacker rolls the weapon’s damage and adds 
out help. Allies can attempt an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check their relevant attribute modifier. The target takes that many 
as a Main Action to stabilize the victim. With no medical tools, hit points of damage.
the difficulty is 10 plus the rounds since they went down. With On a miss, a weapon that inflicts Shock damage might still 
a medkit, it’s difficulty 8 plus the time, and using a Lazarus patch hurt the target. If the weapon’s Shock can harm the target’s 
makes it difficulty 6 plus the time. Failed checks can be attempt- Armor Class, the target takes the weapon’s Shock damage even 
ed again, but a victim will die after the sixth round. on a miss. This damage is increased by the wielder’s relevant 

Stabilized characters regain 1 hit point after ten minutes attribute modifier and any other damage bonuses. A weapon 
and can act normally, but any further damage kills them instant- never does less damage than its Shock would do on a miss.
ly. This fragility ends after they regain more hit points, either 
through rest, stims, or biopsionic healing. Morale in Combat

Stabilized PCs take at least a week to start recovering hit To make a morale check, NPCs roll 2d6. If equal or less than 
points normally. Those who have merely been hurt but not their morale score, they keep fighting. Otherwise, they flee, 
mortally wounded regain their level in lost hit points after every withdraw, or surrender. NPCs check morale after their first 
night’s peaceful rest. casualty and after half are down. PCs never check morale.






EQUIPMENT AND VEHICLES
Every aspiring stellar adventurer needs the essential or four Stowed at the cost of becoming Heavily En-
equipment of his trade. For some, it might consist of cumbered, with base movement reduced to 5 meters 
appropriate toolkits and medical supplies, while oth- per round.
ers prefer to spend the greater part of their funds on On the equipment lists, some items are given an 
heavy weaponry. Prices may vary, but certain needs encumbrance value higher than 1. These items count 
are eternal. as multiple objects for encumbrance purposes, being 

The following tables provide general guidelines heavy, clumsy, or unwieldy to carry.
on the kind of equipment that might be available on a 
reasonably sophisticated world. Prices can vary drasti- Credits and Money
cally depending on the supply of a particular good. A The value of goods is commonly measured in credits. 
remote frontier outpost might have plenty of firearms Before the Silence, the credit issued by the Exchange of 
to hand, but a good guitar might go for ten times the Light was the currency of exchange throughout human 
common rate. Players and GMs should treat the prices space. Most worlds attempt to mimic this currency to 
listed as rough guidelines. greater or lesser success. For game purposes, the credits 

of different starfaring worlds are assumed to be inter-
Encumbrance changeable unless the GM and players care to embrace 
Characters might want to carry an armory on their careers in the murky realm of interstellar currency 
backs and the contents of a general store in their pock- arbitrage. Credits usually take the form of electronic 
ets, but this is rarely a practical ambition. Characters banking entries, though physical “chips” or “notes” of-
can only carry so many things, and carrying a great deal ten appear on more primitive worlds. A hundred of 
can slow them down substantially. these chips count as one item for encumbrance.

A character can have Readied a number of items Prices given for equipment and gear assume that 
equal to half their Strength score, rounded down. they are being bought legally on a world capable of 
Ready items include those that the character is using manufacturing such equipment. Even primitive worlds 
or wearing at all times, or that they have conveniently can occasionally provide more advanced equipment to 
to hand in sheaths, holsters, or belt pouches. Suits of wealthy buyers, assuming they are not completely cut 
armor count as Readied items, but the normal clothing off from interstellar trade, but buying advanced equip-
and jewelry that a character might wear does not. A ment on a primitive world tends to be an exceedingly 
character can draw or produce a Readied item as part expensive prospect. Prices may be double, triple, or as 
of any action they may take during a turn. much as ten times as great for items greatly in demand.

A character may have a number of Stowed items Primitive or isolated worlds might not use or ac-
equal to their full Strength score. Stowed items are cept credits, instead preferring trade goods or precious 
carried in backpacks, in carefully-balanced leg or arm metals. Such worlds rarely have much worth trading 
pockets, or otherwise packed away where they will least for, and those that do tend to rapidly attract other 
encumber the character. If a character needs to get out freebooting merchants. The influx of precious metals 
a Stowed item in a hurry, they must use their Main from cheap asteroid mining soon spoils the market for 
Action to dig it out of their pack or pockets. metals, and the natives usually start to demand credits 

Very small items carried in small numbers do not in payment. The first merchant to a world can make 
count against encumbrance limits. Other small items a killing with the equivalent of beads and trinkets, but 
can be packed together into bundles to simplify their those who come after usually end up needing credits 
carriage, though getting at them then takes an addition- or more useful barter goods.
al round of fumbling with the packaging. Exactly how 
many of a given small item can be packed into a single Equipment Legality
item bundle is up to the GM, though as a rule of thumb Most worlds have their own customs regarding the 
six Type A energy cells or three magazines of bullets open flaunting of weaponry or armor. Visitors are ad-
can be bound into one packed item. Extremely bulky vised to apprise themselves of local law before leaving 
or unwieldy objects might count as multiple items at the starport. Most former frontier worlds tolerate or 
the GM’s discretion. even expect small personal weapons to be carried, but 

Characters can burden themselves with more gear visible armor can often provoke a distinctly negative 
if they’re willing to sacrifice some fleetness of foot to reaction in all but the roughest places. Many worlds 
do so. Up to two additional items can be carried Ready outright forbid civilian ownership of advanced armor 
or four additional ones Stowed at the cost of becom- technology. Officials tend to reason that while a weap-
ing Lightly Encumbered, and having their base move- on may be justified in self-defense, no one would put up 
ment slowed from 10 meters per round to 7 meters with the discomfort of heavy armor without expecting 
per round. A further two items can be carried Ready to make some trouble with it.



62• Equipment

Other worlds may have other idiosyncratic rules mental or physical limitations in exchange for specific 
regarding permissible equipment. Some worlds with improvements useful to a ruling class. Many transhu-
unbreathable atmospheres restrict the possession of man enclaves walked the razor’s edge of this prohibi-
oxygen generation equipment in order to keep the air tion, and some plunged far beyond its limits.
supplies firmly in the hands of the local rulers. Other Thou shalt not create unbraked minds. Artificial in-
planets forbid certain technology on religious or phil- telligence was always difficult and hit-or-miss in its 
osophical grounds. Some worlds grant limited permis- creation, even for Mandate cyberpsychologists. While 
sion to keep these goods secured aboard a ship, but most intelligences fizzled out at far sub-human levels, 
others conduct inspections in the starport to search for those that attain to human-equivalent intelligence must 

“contraband goods”. have certain intentional flaws, or “brakes” inserted in 
A scouting report, a background appropriate to their code. Without this artificial forgetfulness and 

knowing about the world, or a decent Know or Con- irrationality, an AI’s mind risks fixating on unrec-
nect check will all suffice to alert characters to any spe- oncilable contradictions or obsessions as it begins to 
cial laws regarding permissible equipment on a world. grow. These “unbraked AIs” will inevitably eventually 

metastasize into unfathomably brilliant, immeasurably 
Forbidden Science insane intellects. The Perimeter Agency was forced 
While a tremendous range of exotic scientific marvels to maintain a constant vigilance against these rogue 
can be found among the scattered worlds of humanity, minds and their inscrutable purposes.
there are some forms of technology that are viewed Thou shalt not create devices of planetary destruction. 
with an almost-universal suspicion. The lost Terran Conventional gravitic braker emplacements, nuke 
Mandate established three categories of technology as snuffers, and quantum ECM make planet-killer tech 
maltech, science intrinsically vile and disruptive to the more burdensome than it was in the pre-Mandate era. 
peaceful ordering of humanity. While the Mandate’s Even so, tech specifically designed to reduce a habitable 
ancient Perimeter agency no longer exists to excise planet to unlivability was a critical threat to human 
maltech from the human worlds, the heritor worlds of expansion, robbing the species of usable planets and 
the frontier usually still respect these limits. The Nihil burdening its future unacceptably.
Ultra directive of the Mandate contained three broad Even now, most frontier worlds maintain a cultur-
prohibitions in its strictures. al aversion to maltech and flatly forbid its research or 

Thou shalt not make tools of humankind. Any eu- possession. Fortunately, most modern worlds are in-
genic technology designed to fundamentally enslave capable of researching its secrets in the first place, with 
or control humanity was forbidden. While broad, most of its worst marvels restricted to lost Mandate-era 
drawback-free improvements in the human genome research stations. Despite this, there is always some 
have always been difficult to execute, there remain nu- tyrant or zealot reckless enough to imagine that they 
merous techniques for limiting intelligence, crippling can control the dark powers of this tech, and always 
troublesome exercises of will, and accepting grievous someone willing to fetch its relics for their purposes.



Technology Levels •63 

Technology Levels

Ever since the collapse of the Terran Mandate and the Neolithic Tech Level 0

chaos of the Scream, worlds throughout human space Flaked stone tools, carved wood, woven textiles
have been thrown back on their own technological re- Domesticated native flora and fauna
sources. Many worlds perished entirely, dependent on 
vital imports they could no longer obtain, or reliant Bows, clubs, simple armor of organic materials
on technology they could not support without outside 

Pre-Gunpowder Tech Level 1
aid. Others slid down into barbarism as the survivors 
fought over the scraps of a former age. A few even Worked metals for weapons and implements
managed to maintain something resembling a mod- Wind and water power for primitive machinery
ern, space-faring society. In almost no case, however, General pre-gunpowder technology
did these worlds preserve all the arts and sciences they 
once held.

Early Industrial Tech Level 2
Technology levels describe the basic technological 

infrastructure of a world or nation. A tech level of 0 is Steam power and internal combustion engines
equivalent to a Neolithic society, one capable of only Gunpowder firearms and telegraphy
the most primitive technological achievements, while Early Industrial Age technology
TL5 represents the standard level of technology pos-
sessed by the ancient Terran Mandate and the wonders 21st Century Tech Level 3
they were capable of creating.

Postech is the blanket term for all technology that Primitive fission power and nuclear weapons

is still functional and maintainable since the Scream. Computers and modern-era telecommunications
While individual worlds may lack the infrastructure to Primitive intra-system spaceflight
maintain all forms of postech, it is at least theoretical-
ly comprehensible to the average TL4 world. Pretech Postech Tech Level 4
is the word for the more sophisticated technology of Baseline for “modern” post-Silence worlds
the pre-Scream Terran Mandate. Pretech ranges from 
devices slightly superior to standard TL4 hardware to Costly but feasible creation of interstellar starships
objects of utterly inexplicable wonder. Basic gravity control with large, heavy devices

Most modern post-Silence worlds are TL4, capa- Expert system creation, and sometimes VIs
ble of building spike drive starcraft, energy weapons, 
non-sapient expert systems, and other high-tech devic- Varying degrees of cyberware development
es beyond the capacity of 21st-century Earth. Many of Basic genetic manipulation of humans and other life
these worlds have spent centuries gradually rebuilding Limited organ, limb, and tissue cloning
their technology base in the wake of the Scream, piec- Starship or small-building-sized fusion power plants
ing together new methods and techniques that could 
be achieved with purely local resources. The level of Energy projection weapons of various kinds
technological achievement within TL4 is uneven; some 
worlds lack the vital minerals for spike drive creation, Pretech Tech Level 5

while others have never worked to recover cybernetic Difficult but achievable creation of True AIs
technology or expert system creation. Some worlds Gravity manipulation via small-scale devices
preserved enough data and had sufficiently apt local Psionics amplification technology like jump gates
resources to even revive Mandate-era pretech man-
ufacturing for a few specific devices or types of tech. Devices with inexhaustible internal power sources

“Lostworlders” or “barbarians” are those natives of Maltech eugenics, AI unbraking, and planet-killers
worlds that lack TL4 infrastructure. Their tech may be Sophisticated, fine-tuned force field creation
ingenious and might take striking advantage of local 
flora, fauna, and special materials, but they fundamen- Spatial distortion technology and phasing tech
tally lack the data or the local resources to replicate TL4 Nanotechnology at several different scales of effect
technology. Barbarians who have made contact with Extreme human genetic manipulation and control
the wider postech world through far traders or explor- Functional immortality treatments
ers are often acutely aware of their lack, and willing to 
go to extremes to acquire the catalyst tech they need to Limited, localized time control and manipulation
leapfrog past their own local resource limitations. Few 

Pretech-Plus Tech Level 6
realize the cultural dangers involved in such a transfor-
mation, and many fail to survive their own renaissance. Impossible effects indistinguishable from magic



64• Armor

Armor

Armor is a popular acquisition for adventurers as their Shields grant a base AC to their user; 13 for prim-
lifestyle often puts them in harm’s way. Completely itive and riot shields, and 15 for a force pavis. If the 
unarmored human combatants rarely last very long in bearer’s AC is already equal or better, the shield simply 
a fight, and have a base Armor Class of 10. Armored or grants a +1 AC bonus. Primitive and riot shields are 
not, characters add their Dexterity modifiers to their ignored by all weapons that ignore primitive armor.
Armor Class. The higher a person’s AC, the harder it Aside from their AC benefit, a shield also renders 
is to take them out of a fight. the bearer immune to the first instance of melee Shock 

Heavy suits of armor can count as more than one damage they take each round, assuming the shield is 
item for encumbrance purposes. Very light suits may effective against the weapon being used.
not encumber at all. Warpaint is the common term for the bizarre com-

bat fashions and scrap-built street harness of gangers, 
Types of Armor cult enforcers, street toughs, and other marginal sorts 
Armor comes in four general categories. Most worlds with little money but much need for protection. Most 
allow for the legal possession of street armor, while warpaint is fashioned of scrounged scraps of TL4 ma-
heavier gear often requires permits, and may be disal- terials that are exceptionally tough or rigid, filled out 
lowed entirely on more law-encrusted worlds. with gang colors, body paint, intimidating tattoos, and 

Primitive armor is a catch-all covering all armor the usual threatening grimace. It is often exceedingly 
technology that lacks access to advanced materials and impractical but inspirational to its wearer; an NPC in 
processes. While such armor can be very effective in warpaint that is meaningful to them gains a +1 Morale 
protecting against primitive weaponry, it is useless bonus. Most warpaint is either pieced together over 
against advanced TL4 melee weapons and firearms of years or taken from the dead. Actually purchasing a fin-
all kinds. Against these weapons, it is treated as AC 10. ished suit comes at the listed price, assuming someone 
Note that some planets have native flora or fauna ca- can be found willing to part with theirs.
pable of naturally producing extremely effective armor An armored undersuit is a skin-tight bodysuit wo-
materials, ones not susceptible to this limitation. ven of advanced TL4 fibers with exceptional shock-ac-

Street armor is the sort of TL4 gear one can wear tivated rigidity and impact dispersion capabilities. 
in public without social repercussions. Such armor is Transparent panels allow for it to be worn with almost 
disguised as ordinary street clothing or is so light as any outfit without drawing notice or being detected 
to be wearable under an ordinary outfit. PCs can wear without a close tactile examination.
street armor on most worlds without incurring any Secure clothing comes in assorted styles and fash-
trouble from authorities. ions ranging from casual street wear to haute couture. 

Combat armor is obviously armor and cannot be Normal fabrics and components are replaced with light, 
effectively disguised. Most worlds reserve combat ar- flexible armor components that are only slightly hin-
mor to law enforcement officials, military personnel, dering to the wearer. Only close tactile examination 
and the bodyguards of important or wealthy citizens. can distinguish secure clothing from ordinary couture.
Most law enforcers consider anybody wearing combat A deflector array consists of several force field 
armor to be a person clearly expecting military-grade nodes worn beneath ordinary clothing. The invisible 
problems in their immediate future. shield it produces flares only when dangerous energies 

Powered armor is the heaviest personal protection or impact is impending, glowing a brief, bright blue as 
gear available short of an actual mech. Most powered it deflects the attack.
armor requires at least a month of training before it can Security armor is the ordinary working uniform of 
be used effectively by any PC who hasn’t got a back- most law enforcement officials and security personnel. 
ground involving such experience. Someone wearing Various rigid plates and anti-ballistic panels provide 
armor of this class is immune to primitive melee weap- protection for the wearer at minimal extra weight.
ons, unarmed attacks, and any firearm or grenade-scale An armored vacc suit has traded off some comfort 
explosive of TL3 or less. and flexibility for additional protective thickness. Aside 

from functioning as a normal vacc suit, it has only half 
Common Armor Varieties the usual chance to tear when hit by an edged weapon 
Shields are an ancient yet extremely useful adjunct to or suit ripper. The choice between armored or standard 
body armor. Primitive shields are usually of wood or suits is a common debate in spacer bars.
stretched hide, while more modern riot shields tend to- Woven body armor represents the best armor that a 
ward clear plastic. A force pavis is more effective, being TL3 world can manufacture, or an up-armored version 
a small pretech force disc projector that can absorb all of security armor used by TL4 high-threat response 
manner of small arms fire. All shields require one free teams. The design is significantly more cumbersome, 
hand to use effectively. but allows for multiple layers of protection.



Armor •65 

Armor Type Armor Class Cost Enc. Tech Level

Primitive Armor

Shield 13/+1 bonus 10 2 0
Leather jacks, thick hides, quilted armor 13 10 1 0

Cuirass, brigandine, linothorax, half-plate 15 50 1 1
Full plate, layered mail 17 100 2 1

Street Armor

Warpaint 12 300 0 4
Armored Undersuit 13 600 0 4

Secure Clothing 13 300 1 4
Armored Vacc Suit 13 400 2 4

Deflector Array 18 30,000 0 5
Combat Armor

Force Pavis 15/+1 bonus 10,000 1 5
Security Armor 14 700 1 4

Woven Body Armor 15 400 2 3
Combat Field Uniform 16 1,000 1 4

Icarus Harness 16 8,000 1 4
Powered Armor

Vestimentum 18 15,000 0 5
Assault Suit 18 10,000 2 4

Storm Armor 19 20,000 2 5
Field Emitter Panoply 20 40,000 1 5

A combat field uniform is sophisticated battle dress functions as a vacc suit so long as it remains powered, 
fabricated from TL4 ablative coatings, rigid plates, and one that cannot be torn by edged weapons.
shock-activated soft components. The CFU is the stan- Storm armor is a more advanced form of assault 
dard uniform for well-equipped TL4 front-line soldiers. suit, one that can be fabricated only by those worlds 

The Icarus harness is a CFU upgrade for para- that have retained some degree of Mandate-grade 
troopers, and replaces a conventional parachute with technical infrastructure. Aside from functioning as an 
a crude gravity damper that allows the wearer to fall assault suit, the storm armor’s exo-augments allow the 
an unlimited distance without harm. Each fall over 3 wearer to treat their Strength as 4 points higher for 
meters drains a type A power cell. The suit also func- encumbrance purposes. Integral gravitic boosters allow 
tions as a vacc suit for up to 30 minutes per vacc refresh. the wearer to leap up to 20 meters as a Move action, 

A “vestimentum” is a catch-all term for one of the either horizontally or vertically, and allow the wearer 
many ancient Mandate ceremonial armors meant to fall up to 40 meters without suffering harm. An on-
chiefly for parade guards, ritual officiants, cultural board medical computer can attempt last-ditch stabi-
reenactors, or other roles that put elaborate style at a lization of the wearer if all other efforts fail; when the 
premium. While these outfits often look wildly unmil- wearer would normally die from an untreated mortal 
itary, their hyper-advanced components and micron- wound, they can make a Physical save to self-stabilize. 
ized force fields give them the same protection against Storm armor requires the same type B power cell as an 
primitive weapons as any other powered armor. assault suit, and each cell powers it for 24 hours.

An assault suit represents the most sophisticated A field emitter panoply is a heavy-duty pretech 
armor in common use among TL4 worlds. An assault defensive system composed of a half-dozen worn 
suit requires a type B power cell for 24 hours of opera- emitter nodes that sheath the wearer in a nimbus of 
tion, and provides integral encrypted military comms, close-fitting damper fields. The FEP’s pale glow is ob-
low-light and infrared vision, and a built-in energy vious, but it provides all the benefits of storm armor 
feed interface. The latter allows the wearer to connect with no power source required. The FEP is particularly 
the suit to any one weapon or device that uses a type effective at filtering radiation, and renders the wearer 
A power cell as a Main Action. So long as the device immune to any dose that wouldn’t kill them in seconds. 
remains connected to the suit, it is treated as having Many FEPs project intimidating holographic skins over 
unlimited ammunition or operation time. The suit also the wearer when in operation.



66• Ranged Weapons

Ranged Weapons

Ranged weaponry makes up the majority of the lethal Revolvers are quite popular on frontier worlds, as 
implements that litter the galaxy. Whether the prim- the weapons are extremely reliable and can be repaired 
itive bows of a remnant colony on some desolate lost and manufactured even by primitive metallurgists. 
world or the sophisticated energy weapons of a mod- Some revolver variants are specially built to handle 
ern interstellar freebooter, the ability to kill people at atmospheres that would destroy more fragile weapons.
a comfortable distance is universally prized. Rifles are the mainstays of most TL2 armies and 

One Type A power cell is sufficient to recharge an hunters, thanks to their superior range and power.
energy weapon’s magazine. For simplicity during play, Shotguns are cheaper and more easily manufac-
ammunition calibers aren’t tracked; a bullet is a bullet tured than rifles, and are popular weapons for home 
when it comes to feeding your favorite gun. defense on the frontier. The statistics given are for shot 

Weapons are listed with their normal and maxi- ammunition. Slug rounds do 2d6 damage and have 
mum range in meters. Attacks beyond normal range ranges of 50/75 meters.
take a -2 penalty to hit rolls. Semi-automatic pistols trade some of the reliability 

of the revolver for a larger magazine size. They tend to 
Burst Mode be the favorite sidearm for locals on planets that lack 
Some weaponry can fire in burst mode, allowing the the harsh conditions or uncertain maintenance oppor-
wielder to fire three rounds of ammunition for a +2 bo- tunities of a frontier world.
nus to hit and damage against the target. For projectile Submachine guns take pistol ammunition but fire 
weapons, this means firing actual bullets, while energy it at a high rate of speed. These weapons can fire in 
weapons spread the beam or run the circuits hot to burst mode.
project additional power. Dumping more ammunition Combat rifles are favored by the militaries of tech 
than this at once is generally impractical; energy weap- level 3 worlds, trading some of the often-unnecessary 
ons would melt down and projectile launchers would range and penetration of a conventional rifle for a 
buck uncontrollably. True suppressive fire is usually larger ammunition capacity and burst fire capabilities. 
only possible with Heavy weapons. On more strait-laced worlds such military weaponry is 

often illegal for civilians to possess.
Projectile Weaponry Combat shotguns are more complicated and tem-
Projectile weapons are by far the most common ranged peramental versions of conventional shotguns. These 
weapons in human use. Even comparatively primitive weapons have substantially larger ammunition capacity 
worlds can fabricate and maintain such weaponry, and and are capable of firing in burst mode. Combat shot-
the damage a flying chunk of hot lead can do is often guns can fire slug rounds just as normal shotguns.
worse than what a clean burst of laser fire might pro- Sniper rifles are designed to be exceptionally ef-
duce. Almost any world of TL2 or higher can provide fective at dropping unsuspecting targets at long range. 
projectile ammunition. Most sophisticated modern Aside from the additional effective range of a sniper 
ammunition works even in vacuum conditions. rifle, any target it mortally wounds via an execution 

Bows are uncommon weapons in the far future, attack will die instantly, with no chance for stabiliza-
though some lostworlder barbarians have nothing bet- tion. The execution attack must qualify according to 
ter. Some sophisticated “conversion bows” use special the terms on page 52. If the rifle is used outside of such 
materials to convert the kinetic energy of the draw into conditions, it has no special qualities.
a force field “glazing” around the arrow, improving Void carbines are designed for vacuum and ze-
penetration. Bows can be reloaded with a Move action, ro-gee use, and have essentially no recoil. Their rounds 
or faster if the Gunslinger focus is applied. cannot penetrate ordinary ship equipment plating.

Grenade users always roll to attack AC 10. On a Mag weaponry involves the magnetic acceleration 
miss, the grenade lands 1d10 meters away from the of metal flechettes, while spike throwers are the shot-
target in a random direction. Hit or miss, the grenade gun equivalents of these weapons. Mag ammunition is 
then explodes for 2d6 damage to all targets within 5 packaged with integral power supplies, so no additional 
meters. Victims are allowed an Evasion save for half power cells are necessary to fire these weapons.
damage. Targets take 1 less point of damage for each 
point of AC above 14. Grenades can be thrown with Energy Weaponry
the Exert skill instead of Shoot, if desired. While the heavy metal slugs and flechettes thrown by 

Crude pistols and muskets represent the rawest and projectile weaponry tend to be more damaging, the lack 
most primitive forms of gunpowder weaponry, usually of recoil for non-Heavy energy weapons makes them 
makeshift weapons improvised by criminals or the des- more accurate, granting them a +1 bonus to hit rolls.
perate. Reloading a crude pistol or a musket requires Energy weapons are very popular on more ad-
two rounds instead of one. vanced worlds, as a soldier can carry far more ammu-



Ranged Weapons •67 

Ranged Weapon Dmg. Range Cost Magazine Attr. Enc TL

Primitive Bow 1d6 50/75 15 1 Dex 2 1
Advanced Bow 1d6 100/150 50 1 Dex 2 3
Conversion Bow 1d8 150/300 500 1 Dex 2 4
Grenade 2d6 10/30 25 N/A Dex 1 3
Crude Pistol 1d6 5/15 20 1@ Dex 1 2
Musket 1d12 25/50 30 1@ Dex 2 2
Revolver 1d8 30/100 50 6 Dex 1 2
Rifle 1d10+2 200/400 75 6 Dex 2 2
Shotgun 3d4 10/30 50 2 Dex 2 2
Semi-Auto Pistol 1d6+1 30/100 75 12 Dex 1 3
Submachine Gun 1d8* 30/100 200 20 Dex 1 3
Combat Rifle 1d12* 100/300 300 30 Dex 2 3
Combat Shotgun 3d4* 10/30 300 12 Dex 2 3
Sniper Rifle 2d8 1,000/2,000 400 1 Dex 2 3
Void Carbine 2d6 100/300 400 10 Dex 2 4
Mag Pistol 2d6+2 100/300 400 6 Dex 1 4
Mag Rifle 2d8+2 300/600 500 10 Dex 2 4
Spike Thrower 3d8* 20/40 600 15 Dex 2 4
Laser Pistol 1d6 100/300 200 10 Dex 1 4
Laser Rifle 1d10* 300/500 300 20 Dex 2 4
Thermal Pistol 2d6 25/50 300 5 Dex 1 4
Plasma Projector 2d8 50/100 400 6 Dex 2 4
Shear Rifle 2d8* 100/300 600 10 Dex 2 5
Thunder Gun 2d10 100/300 1,000 6 Dex 2 5
Distortion Cannon 2d12 100/300 1,250 6 Dex 2 5

* this weapon can fire in burst mode @ this weapon requires two Main Actions to reload

nition in the form of energy cells than they can carry Shear rifles are the product of a relatively few 
bullets. Range and accuracy are often superior, though functioning pretech manufactories. These weapons 
the infrastructure necessary for maintenance and repair use miniaturized grav projectors to create dangerous 
of these weapons is substantially higher. repulsor fields inside a target, tearing the object apart 

Pistol-sized energy weapons count as one item of along perfectly smooth planes. Shear rifles are com-
encumbrance, while rifles, thunder guns, plasma pro- pletely silent in operation.
jectors, and distortion cannons count as two items. Thunder guns are named for the basso vibrations 

Laser pistols and laser rifles are the most common caused by their operation, a sound that can be felt 
type of energy weapon, though pistols are considerably as far as thirty meters away from an operator. This 
less energy-efficient. Depending on the tech used in the two-handed weapon uses grav plates to create rapid, 
sector, they might produce silent, invisible beams of randomized disruptions in a target that increase the 
death or noisy, brightly-colored streaks of lethal light. chance of complete structural collapse. If a thunder gun 
The phased multifrequency beam is capable of pene- hits a target with an unmodified hit roll of 16 or high-
trating any ordinary mist or haze, but a thick cloud of er an extra 1d10 damage is rolled. This bonus damage 
thermally-resistant particulate matter such as ash or always applies to inanimate targets.
sand can seriously degrade the beam, applying up to a Distortion cannons are among the most sophisticat-

-4 penalty to hit and cutting ranges in half. ed man-portable weapons designed before the Scream. 
Thermal pistols and their larger, two-handed plas- These two-handed energy weapons rely on the same 

ma projector cousins replace the beam of a laser with principle as does a spike drive, manipulating the un-
a small sphere of magnetically-shaped plasma. The derlying fabric of space to disrupt a target. Provided 
spheres tend to dissipate at much shorter ranges than the wielder can see a target within range or accurately 
a laser beam, but do significantly more damage to tar- fix its location within one meter, the distortion cannon 
gets within range and are not affected by ambient par- can ignore up to one meter of solid cover between the 
ticulates. They tend to be extremely loud in operation. gun and its target.



68• Melee Weapons

Melee Weapons

Despite the relentless march of science, melee weapons 
are still useful adjuncts on the field of battle. They are Other Melee Weapons
silent, cheap, often easily concealed, and much more re- Stun batons are common law enforcement tools. The 
liably murderous than firearms or laser weaponry. It’s damage they do can drop a target to zero hit points, but 
easy to miss a moving target in the adrenaline-fueled will not kill them, the victim awakening in ten minutes 
chaos of a firefight. It’s much harder to go astray with with one hit point. Stun batons trickle-charge from 
a monoblade knife in your fist. normal movement and will not run out of electrical 

energy under normal use conditions.
Types of Common Weapons Suit rippers are rods with fractal cutting surfaces 
Rather than enumerate every possible type of sharp designed to cripple vacc suit auto-repair routines. Ev-
object and blunt implement that has been used for ery hit with a suit ripper counts as a suit tear on a vacc 
death-dealing amid the scattered stars, melee weapons suit-wearing enemy. Unsurprisingly, these weapons 
are divided into three classes. are strictly illegal in space environments.

Small weapons are small one-handed implements Unarmed attacks reflect ordinary kicks and punch-
no larger than a baton or knife. These weapons are es. Unarmed attacks always add the attacker’s Punch 
easily concealed in normal clothing, and can even be skill to damage rolls, unlike other weapons. Kinesis 
kept Readied up sleeves or in tailored pockets. Many wraps, spiked knuckles, and other small fist weapons 
can be thrown at a range up to 10 meters. may be treated as small advanced or primitive weapons 

Medium weapons are one-handed swords, axes, that use the Punch skill and add the skill level to their 
spears, or other obvious implements of war. While rolled damage, but not to Shock. Such weapons do not 
they can’t be effectively concealed in anything small- augment a hero with the Unarmed Combatant focus.
er than an enveloping cloak or coat, they’re also more 
damaging to an unfortunate victim struck by them, al- Shock
beit they’re somewhat less nimble when the wielder Many melee weapons have a Shock trait represent-
needs to strike at unprotected flesh. Spears and similar ing the danger they pose to an ill-armored opponent. 
aerodynamic weapons can be thrown up to 30 meters. Shock damage represents the inevitable cuts, bruises, 

Large weapons are two-handed implements of exhaustion, and terror of close combat.
bodily ruin such as claymores, halberds, tetsubos, or Shock damage is only inflicted on a melee target if 
other such weapons. Unlike smaller weapons, they the hit roll fails, and it only applies if the target has an 
rely largely on Strength for their employ, and can bash AC equal or less than that listed for the Shock.
through lighter forms of armor. Large weapons count Shock damage always includes the wielder’s attri-
as two encumbrance items. bute modifier and any bonus damage granted by weap-

Aside from their type, weapons are counted as on mods, foci, advanced tech, or other damage bonuses. 
primitive or advanced. A primitive weapon is simply An actual hit with a weapon never does less damage 
one of ordinary metal or wood, with no high-tech than Shock would otherwise inflict; if the user some-
augmentations. An advanced one has been given a how rolls less damage, use the Shock damage instead.
monoblade edge, kinetic sheathing, thermal wires, a Thus, if you had a Strength score of 14 and were 
chainsaw blade, or some other TL4 touch. Primitive swinging an oversized alien battle axe at a target with 
weapons are often unable to harm targets in powered AC 13, you would inflict 3 points of damage on a miss; 
armor, while advanced weapons can ignore primitive 2 from the weapon’s Shock, plus 1 from your Strength 
plate and hide protections. modifier. If you hit, you’d do at least 3 points.

Weapon Damage Shock Attribute Cost Enc. TL

Small primitive weapon 1d4 1 point/AC 15 Str/Dex 0 1 0
Medium primitive weapon 1d6+1 2 points/AC 13 Str/Dex 20 1 0
Large primitive weapon 1d8+1 2 points/AC 15 Str 30 2 0
Small advanced weapon 1d6 1 point/AC 15 Str/Dex 40 1 4
Medium advanced weapon 1d8+1 2 points/AC 13 Str/Dex 60 1 4
Large advanced weapon 1d10+1 2 points/AC 15 Str 80 2 4
Stun baton 1d8 1 point/AC 15 Str/Dex 50 1 4
Suit ripper 1d6 None Str/Dex 75 1 4
Unarmed attack 1d2 None Str/Dex - - -



Heavy Weapons •69 

Heavy Weapons

Some weapons are simply too big to be comfortably Evasion saving throw for half damage. Victims within 
used without a tripod, fixed support, or vehicle mount- forty meters take half damage, with an Evasion save 
ing. Others require specialized training in the use of for none. The charge is sufficient to blow a four-meter 
heavy munitions. The weapons listed here all use the wide hole in anything short of a reinforced wall. PCs 
Shoot skill to determine hit bonuses, and unless other- with a background in demolitions or Fix-0 skill can 
wise noted, all require some sort of support for firing. shape the charge so it directs the blast in only one di-

Energy weapons use Type B power cells. Rocket rection, sparing all but two meters of the rest.
launchers and hydra arrays use missiles as given on the Railguns are simply scaled-up versions of personal 
gear tables, while heavy machine guns and wheatcutter mag rifles. They accelerate large metallic slugs along 
belts consume large amounts of standard ammunition. the weapon’s barrel, creating a steady spray of hyper-

Some heavy guns can be fired to suppress. Double velocity rounds. Ammunition sufficient for one round 
the usual ammunition is fired in one round, and every of firing costs 50 credits.
target in front of the weapon that is not under hard Anti-vehicle lasers are less useful against soft targets, 
cover is automatically hit for half normal damage. A but excel at penetrating vehicle armor. Against vehicles 
successful Evasion saving throw eliminates this damage. and other hard-skinned targets, damage is rolled twice 

When firing at TL4 military vehicles such as and the better result is used.
gravtanks, mechs, or starship armor, most TL3 Heavy Hydra arrays sequence a number of missile 
weapons don’t count as Heavy for armor-penetrating launchers to fire at once. The gunner designates up to 
purposes. Demo charges and explosives do, however. three targets and can then make three rolls to hit divid-

ed among them. Each successful hit on a target allows 
Heavy Weapons the gunner to roll damage once, but only the highest 
Heavy machine guns represent a large family of air- or damage roll is applied to the target. Thus, if all three 
water-cooled projectile weapons that are usually fed volleys were aimed at a single target and two of them 
with belts of linked ammunition. HMGs require a ve- hit, the gunner would roll damage twice and apply the 
hicle mounting or emplaced firing position for effective best result. A volley from the array costs 150 credits.
results. An HMG magazine contains enough ammuni- Wheatcutter belts are one of several different an-
tion for 10 rounds of firing, but each round of firing tipersonnel measures often installed on gravtanks and 
eats 25 credits worth of projectile ammunition. other fighting vehicles. When triggered, a belt of ex-

Rocket launchers cover a wide variety of man-por- plosives fires off a scything blast of shrapnel on any side 
table missile launchers of varying degrees of sophisti- of the vehicle. All creatures within 10 meters of that 
cation. The weapons are usually equipped with basic side of the vehicle must make an Evasion save for half 
tracking sensors, but are of limited accuracy against hu- damage. Those within 20 meters take half damage, and 
man-sized targets. Rocket launchers take a -4 hit penal- can make an Evasion save to take none at all. Wheat-
ty against targets of human size or smaller. Unlike most cutter belts do not ignore a vehicle’s Armor like other 
Heavy weapons, rocket launchers can be shoulder-fired Heavy weapons do. Reloading a wheatcutter belt costs 
without a prepared emplacement to support them. 200 credits per round.

Demo Charges are the general run of placed explo- Vortex cannons use controlled gravitic shear planes 
sives beloved of terrorists and adventurers the world to cause a target to simply fall apart into component 
over. The usual variety can be detonated by radio fragments. The cannons are silent in operation, but so 
signals, timers, or electrical charges, and inflict their heavy and complex that they can only be mounted on 
damage on any objects within twenty meters, with an gravtanks and other similar dedicated fighting vehicles.

Heavy Weapon Dmg. Range Cost Mag Enc. Attr. TL

Heavy Machine Gun 3d6# 500/2,000 5,000 10 3 Dex 3
Rocket Launcher 3d10 2,000/4,000 4,000 1 2 Dex 3
Demo Charge 3d10 20/40 250 - 1 - 3
Railgun 3d8# 4,000/8,000 8,000 20 * Dex 4
Anti-Vehicle Laser 3d10 2,000/4,000 10,000 15 * Dex 4
Hydra Array 3d6# 4,000/8,000 20,000 10 * Dex 4
Wheatcutter Belt 2d12 10/20 10,000 5 * Dex 4
Vortex Cannon 5d12 1,000/2,000 75,000 5 * Dex 5

# this weapon can fire to suppress 



70• General Equipment

Field Equipment Cost Enc. TL

General Equipment Atmofilter 100 1 4
Backpack 5/50 1/* 0/4

Most of the equipment listed here is available on any 
TL4 world. Even the TL5 items are among the simpler Binoculars 20/200 1 3/4
and more ubiquitous pretech relics and could likely Climbing harness 50 1 3
be acquired on a sufficiently prosperous world with a Glowbug 5 * 3
good market in Mandate tech. Buying any TL5 equip- Grapnel launcher 200 1 3
ment on the open market is subject to GM approval, 
however, and many worlds are flatly ban private own- Grav chute 300/1,000 1 4/5
ership of ancient Mandate technology. Grav harness 5,000 3 5

Some encumbrance entries are marked with an Instapanel 50 1# 4
asterisk. Such items have no significant encumbrance Low-light goggles 200 1 3
and dozens can be carried without hindrance.

Other entries are marked with a hashmark. These Navcomp 500 1 4
objects can be conveniently packed together in a small- Portabox 50 1 4
er, more portable package. Three such objects can be Pressure tent 100 4 3
packed together as a single encumbrance item. For Rations, 1 day 5 1# 1
ammunition, one loaded magazine counts as one item. 
Breaking open such a package to get at the contents Rope, 20 meters 4/40 2/1 0/4
takes a Main Action, however, before they can be Scout report 200 * 4
Readied with another Main Action. Survey scanner 250 1 4

Survival kit 60 1 4
Telescoping pole 10 * 4
Thermal flare 5 * 3

Ammo and Power Cost Enc. TL Trade goods 50 1# 4
Ammo, 20 rounds 10 1# 2 Trade metals 10 1# 4
Ammo, missile 50 1 3 Vacc fresher 400 1 4
Power cell, type A 10 1# 4 Vacc skin 1,000 1 5
Power cell, type B 100 1 4 Vacc suit 100 2 4
Solar recharger 500 3 4
Telekinetic generator 250 2 4 Pharmaceuticals Cost/Dose Enc. TL

Bezoar 200 * 4
Brainwave 1,000 * 5

Communications Cost Enc. TL Hush 200 * 4
Comm server 1,000 3 4 Lift 50 * 4
Compad 100 * 4 Psych 25 * 4
Field radio 200 1 4 Pretech Cosmetic 1,000 * 5
Translator torc 200 * 4 Reverie 100 * 4

Squeal 300 * 4
Tsunami 50 * 4

Computing Gear Cost Enc. TL

Black slab 10,000 1 4 Tools and Medical Cost Enc. TL

Data phase tap 5,000 1 4 Bioscanner 300 1 4
Data protocol 1,000 * 4 Lazarus patch 30 1# 4
Dataslab 300 1 4 Medkit 100 2 4
Line shunt 100 * 4 Metatool 200 1 4
Remote link unit 250 1 4 Spare parts 50 1# 4
Stiletto charge * 1 5 Tailored antiallergens 5 * 4
Storage unit 500 3 4 Toolkit/Postech 300 3 4
Tightbeam link unit 1,000 1 4 Toolkit/Pretech 1,000 1 5



General Equipment •71 

Ammo and Power Communications
The finest product of a 33rd-century armory is useless Almost all TL4 worlds have a planetary communica-
if it lacks the bullets or power cells to feed it. For ease tions grid compatible with any standard compad. Some 
of play, ammunition can be used interchangeably with planets are less technologically gifted, however, or have 
any projectile weapon. Power cells are designed along local conditions that preclude easy wireless commu-
Mandate-era lines that allow for easy compatibility nication. Other times, the PCs have reason to avoid 
among devices from different worlds. leaving call logs that might come back to haunt them.

Ammunition: A few worlds are too primitive or too Comm server: A powerful base unit for providing com-
resource-poor to manufacture ammunition, but munications without comsats. The server pro-
the vast majority of worlds provide cartridges in vides service between up to three dozen compads 
almost every conceivable caliber and make. Most within 300 kilometers of the unit. Server usage 
local gunsmiths can load ammunition to any spec- can be locked to specific compads, and all trans-
ification required by a buyer. missions are heavily encrypted. A comm server 

Ammunition, missile: Some characters might have rea- can function for several months on a type B cell.
son to pack along a man-portable rocket launcher, Compad: One of a host of different hand-held portable 
or have one mounted on their favorite gravcar. communications devices. Most TL4 worlds have 
Heavy weapons and their ammunition are usually global comm coverage, but primitive worlds ren-
outlawed for civilians on most worlds, but this der these devices useless without a nearby comm 
price is for locales where missiles can be bought. server to provide connectivity.

Power cells: One of the few standardized artifacts in- Field Radio: On worlds too primitive to have a comm 
herited from before the Silence, power cells are grid, adventurers often fall back on these head-
small cylindrical objects designed to take and hold set-mounted field radios. A single type A cell 
electrical charges. Type A cells are usually used for powers them for months of use. Urban or rugged 
personal equipment, and the larger type B cells terrain limits their range to about two kilometers, 
for vehicles and heavy gear. The engineering for while flat plains give a maximum range of thir-
the cells is substantially different, and they cannot ty kilometers. Someone with at least Program-0 
be exchanged or recharge each other without a skill can use the radio’s shortwave functionality 
trained tech’s modifications or a converter unit. to communicate with a prepared target at conti-
Power cells can be recharged off a ship’s power nental distances if given ten minutes for tuning.
plant or other grid. Recharging requires 30 min- Translator torc: Each translator torc is keyed for two 
utes for a type A cell or 24 hours for a type B cell. languages, and will automatically translate what it 

Solar recharger: This recharger unfolds into a 2 meter hears in one into speech in the other. The trans-
by 2 meter square field of solar cells. Granted a lations are eccentric in many cases, and there is 
primary star of roughly Earth-like intensity, it can always a several-second delay between each state-
recharge one type A power cell per day. ment and its translation. Any attempts to exert 

Telekinetic generator: While this device assumes the social skills or Charisma through a translator torc 
presence of a trained telekinetic, it isn’t strictly suffer a -2 skill check penalty. The torc is powered 
psitech, as its operation is quite simple. A teleki- by one type A power cell, which lasts for one week 
netic user pushes a resistance bar within the gen- of regular use.
erator, causing a flow of electricity to recharge an 
attached power cell. Any telekinetic with Teleki-
nesis-1 skill or better can recharge a cell with fif-
teen minutes of concentration. In an emergency, a 
character with at least Strength 10 can operate the 
generator manually, though they need to succeed 
on a difficulty 8 Con/Exert skill check in order to 
keep up the pace for an hour. Failure means that 
the character must rest for at least an hour before 
trying again. The generator can charge one type 
A power cell at a time.



72• General Equipment

Computing Gear Stiletto charge: These ancient Mandate-era polymor-
Computing devices are ubiquitous on most TL4 worlds, phic intrusion charges were originally made to al-
though not all of them have the kind of planetary net- low Mandate agents to easily overcome primitive 
work known on 21st century Terra. Would-be hackers colonial data security measures. Each charge is a 
often find it necessary to take a very personal hand in small interface plug the size of a human thumb. 
breaching site security. When used as part of a hack against a TL4 system, 

it causes the skill check to automatically succeed 
Black slab: While a “black slab” appears to be a normal regardless of the difficulty. Without line shunts, 

dataslab to casual examination, these devices are however, the duration of the hack is still no more 
packed with intrusion-optimization hardware than the usual 1d4 rounds plus the hacker’s Pro-
and integral line tapping tools. They function as gram skill. These devices are single-use, and are 
a metatool for purposes of accessing data lines and prized so highly that they are almost always un-
grant a +1 bonus to all hacking attempts made available for conventional purchase. Favors to the 
with them. They are also quite illegal on most right people and the looting of Mandate remnants 
worlds, available only from black market dealers are the only normal ways to acquire these devices.
and private sales from hackers. Storage unit: While conventional dataslabs have am-

Data phase tap: This handheld device is normally illegal ple space to hold any reasonable amount of data, 
outside the possession of licensed data line repair sometimes a party needs to store or acquire a truly 
technicians. The tap can detect data lines with- huge dataset. This standard TL4 storage unit is a 
in five meters through up to ten centimeters of portable but clumsy case hardened against any-
ordinary walls, and can generate an energy ma- thing short of intentional damage with a firearm, 
nipulation field that allows tapping that data line capable of interfacing with a wide variety of hard-
for hacking purposes without physically damaging ware to receive and upload data. A single storage 
the wall. unit can hold a tremendous amount of data that 

Data protocol: Not so much a device as a collection of has been carefully compressed and optimized for 
standard manuals on a world’s particular data for- it. If the user is simply ripping a database off a 
mats and security methodologies. The price list- network and stuffing it into the unit, it can absorb 
ed here are for black-market manuals on worlds up to a small corporation’s complete files.
where this information is rigidly restricted. On Tightbeam link unit: Much like a remote link unit, a 
less paranoid planets, the equivalent information tightbeam unit uses a laser to connect via line-
can be acquired for free. of-sight transmission. Unlike a remote link unit, 

Dataslab: A palm-sized computing device that can un- there’s almost no chance for a conventional secu-
fold into a thin slab roughly one-third of a meter rity system to detect this link, but it requires that 
on a side. It can perform all the functions of a com- the infiltrators get a clear line of sight between 
pad or handheld computer and can communicate the unit and the receiving end. Commercial satel-
wirelessly with nearby devices. lite reception units can be employed for skyward 

Line shunt: These palm-sized discs are roughly one cen- aiming at 500 credits/hour if a second land unit is 
timeter in thickness, with an adhesive side that unavailable, but indoor use is impossible.
will stick to virtually anything and a polychromat-
ic phased compound on its shell which will shift Foreign Protocols
color to blend with its surroundings. One or more 
line shunts must be applied at specific locations Most surviving human worlds continue to use a 
within a site to access the more well-defended va- basic Mandate-derived communications protocol 
rieties of computerized systems. Shunts employ that ensures a minimal level of compatibility be-
phased energy manipulation tech, and so do not tween hardware from different worlds. While the 
need to be directly in contact with a data line but performance may not be ideal, tech purchased on 
only within a few centimeters. Line shunts are one world should still be able to interface with the 
single-use, and keep functioning until removed. local tech on a different planet.

Remote link unit: These data broadcast link units have Even so, a few worlds of a more xenophobic 
been preloaded with one-time pad security mea- or isolated nature intentionally abandon this stan-
sures, advanced stealth circuitry, and sophisticated dard protocol in favor of their own. PC hardware 
data progression algorithms. Two of these links on these worlds will not communicate with the 
can allow a user to maintain contact with a remote local grid unless a PC with Program or Fix skills 
data storage unit. The connection is too “stiff” to has a chance to reset the protocols to something 
allow for easy hacking, however, and it applies a compatible with local conditions. Such work usu-

-2 penalty to any attempts to hack through it. Pro- ally takes at least a day to adjust all the gear the 
fessional-grade security systems often have means group might possess.
to detect the broadcast of a remote link unit.



General Equipment •73 

Pharmaceuticals Pretech Cosmetic (None): Before the Silence stims ex-
Modern pharmaceuticals are usually applied as “stims”; isted for a host of cosmetic, hygiene, and health 
small capsules that are pressed against the target’s skin purposes. While these effects are trivial, the basic 
for application. While a wide variety of common over- pretech stim substrate also works to heal 1d6 lost 
the-counter stims are available, the ones listed below hit points in the user at a cost of 1 System Strain.
are some particularly likely to be useful to adventurers. Psych (None): A military drug duplicated in rougher 
Many medical stims require a minimum level in the form by many street chemists, Psych fills the user 
Heal skill to successfully apply them, while others add with an intense sense of confidence and reck-
System Strain to the target as described on page 32. If a less courage. Unfortunately, it also cripples their 
subject’s System Strain is too high already, the stim has judgment regarding danger. A person affected by 
no positive effect. Some of the combat stims below are Psych immediately gains a Morale score of 12 and 
usually illegal for civilian possession, but street sources a +1 bonus on all skill checks, but will ignore cover 
are available at the prices given. during combat and cannot decide not to attempt a 

Modern vacc suits and powered armor have med- skill check after learning its difficulty. The effect 
ical ports that allow for applying stims and other med- lasts fifteen minutes, adds 1 System Strain to the 
ical treatment without removing the suit. user, and is highly psychologically addictive.

Reverie (Heal-1): This very dangerous combat drug 
Bezoar (Heal-1): A complex antibiotic cocktail, Bezoar completely subdues the subject’s fear centers and 

is an effective default treatment for a wide variety adrenaline production, leaving them perfect-
of infectious diseases. When applied to a suffer- ly calm and relaxed even in the midst of mortal 
er, roll 1d6; on a 1, this victim cannot be helped danger. Their reaction speed is much slower as a 
by Bezoar, while otherwise the affliction is cured consequence, and they may act only on even-num-
within 24 hours. Each application of Bezoar adds bered combat rounds; so on the second, fourth, 
1 System Strain to the target, and it cannot cure and sixth rounds and so forth. Any damage they 
cancers, bioweapons, or congenital diseases. suffer is doubled as well due to their lack of vigi-

Brainwave (Heal-2): This psitech drug requires ad- lance. Their perfect calm allows them to shoot as 
vanced TL5 facilities to compound, and the few if on the target range, however, and they can make 
remaining doses from pre-Silence periods are Dex/Shoot skill checks to hit a target instead of 
rarely available on the open market. Application hit rolls; the difficulty is 7 at point blank, 9 at nor-
of Brainwave gives a psychic 2 extra maximum mal ranges, and 11 at long ranges for the weapon. 
Effort for one hour. At the end of that hour, they The target’s Armor Class is ignored. Melee attacks 
suffer 4 points of System Strain. If their Strain is made under Reverie always hit. Reverie lasts for 
maximized by this, they go unconscious for one ten minutes and adds 2 System Strain to the target.
hour. Only one dose can be active at a time. Squeal (Heal-1): This “truth serum” is unreliable but still 

Hush (Heal-0): An extremely heavy neurotranquilizer, one of the best available options for field interro-
Hush leaves the subject awake and responsive to gations. The subject must be immobilized or will-
simple, untaxing commands. They cannot fight ing to be affected by it. For five minutes afterwards 
or communicate while affected by Hush, but will they will be unable to avoid answering questions 
walk, eat, sit, and perform simple actions as di- about facts known to them; they will be unable 
rected by the last person to speak to them. A Hush to exercise anything resembling a hypothesis or a 
dose lasts for an hour plus three per Heal level of judgment, but they will answer specific questions 
the person applying the stim, and the subject re- about facts known to them truthfully. Unwilling 
tains no memories while under the effect. A sub- victims can attempt a Physical saving throw; on 
ject must be immobilized or willing to be affected a success, they can simply refuse to speak about 
by Hush; violent physical movement immediately one particular topic of their choice. Targets pass 
after application disrupts the neurological effects. out for 1d6 hours after the drug wears off and are 

Lift (Heal-0): A Lift stim augments and amplifies the immune to it for a week thereafter.
body’s natural response to physical injury and ex- Tsunami (Heal-1): An emergency combat stim used to 
haustion. This boost speeds natural recovery dras- juice certain expendable soldiers before an assault, 
tically and heals 1d8 plus the user’s Heal skill in Tsunami fills them with a reckless disregard for 
hit points after five minutes of rest. Lift stims do pain and an intense aggressiveness. The short 
not work on PCs who are mortally wounded; they effect duration and difficult application limits its 
need to be stabilized before the Lift can help them, wider use, however. Subjects gain a Morale score 
though application to a stabilized target will get of 12, 10 extra hit points for ten minutes and a +2 
them back on their feet and active again. Each ap- bonus on all hit rolls. At the end of the duration, 
plication adds 1 System Strain to the target. Each they immediately lose those 10 hit points, which 
additional application of Lift to a target the same may leave them mortally wounded. Each applica-
day increases the minimum Heal skill needed by 1. tion adds 2 System Strain to the target.



74• General Equipment

Tools and Medical Gear to fix a damaged object, severely broken devices 
While a skilled technician or expert physician can may need replacement parts. Rather than keep a 
make do with improvised tools scrounged from their catalog of bits and pieces, a technician can simply 
surroundings, most adventurers prefer to be bet- bring along one or more units of spare parts, sub-
ter-equipped to face unavoidable perils. Most of these tracting one whenever the GM decides that a re-
tools and medical supplies are available on any TL4 pair effort requires more than existing salvage can 
world, though pretech toolkits usually require excellent support. A unit of spare parts can also be used to 
personal contacts to obtain. jury-rig some basic, uncomplicated tool or weap-

on from the equipment list with ten or fifteen 
Bioscanner: While an untrained user can use this tool to minutes of assembly and at least Fix-0 skill. Such 

discern internal bleeding, gross physical distress, bodged devices rarely last longer than one scene.
or toxins in a plant or animal, it requires Heal-0 Tailored Antiallergens: A dose of tailored antiallergens 
skill to use this tool to its fullest. Such operators can be used to render a local world’s organics large-
can use the bioscanner for a full spectrum of di- ly edible by humans and its atmosphere breathable 
agnosis and DNA sequencing achievable in min- without severe allergic reactions. While many 
utes. One type A power cell will power it for up worlds have been seeded with Terran life forms or 
to twenty-four hours of regular usage. have produced organics that are edible by humans, 

Lazarus patch: A vital tool for adventurers, the lazarus others are toxic without the appropriate chemical 
patch is a heavy compress laced with antibiotics, augmentation. A dose of these antiallergens lasts 
coagulants, system stabilizers, plasma, and a one- for twenty-four hours.
shot diagnostic suite. If the patch is applied to a Toolkits: Containing a wide range of necessary tools for 
character that has fallen to 0 hit points, the user a particular skill set, toolkits can handle almost 
can make an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check any job that doesn’t require a full-scale shop or lab. 
against difficulty 6 to stabilize the subject. The A standard postech toolkit can handle electronics, 
more time between injury and application, the less small welding jobs, and basic repair on ordinary 
chance the patch has to work. Each round after TL4 goods. More sophisticated pretech tools are 
the first, an additional -1 penalty is applied to the necessary for working on advanced TL5 artifacts, 
skill check. The patch is no use after six rounds. If and the tools themselves are very rare and difficult 
the medic fails the first skill check, they can keep to obtain.
trying the check once per round until the victim 
is revived or time runs out. Building New Tech

	Lazarus patches are no use on victims that 
have died of disease, poison, or have been man- In a science-fiction game, it’s often difficult to fig-
gled beyond surgical repair by Heavy weapons or ure out the limits of ad-hoc tech. When the limits 
similar trauma. Only one patch can be applied to of technology often seem to be based on genre 
a victim. Revived victims are critically wounded rather than physics it can be tough to make the call.
until sufficient medical help has been tendered; Most of the time, it’s simply not practical for 
see the Systems chapter for details. a technician to devise dramatic new tech without 

Medkit: Containing a broad supply of pharmaceuti- the use of a full-scale research facility.
cals, spray bandages, glue sutures, and a succinct Even so, sometimes a PC will ask to build 
handbook of injury care, the medkit is designed something that creates a particular effect that 
for handling sudden and drastic injuries. It also seems in line with other gear of a similar tech level. 
contains all the necessary tools for providing A hologram-emitting “grenade”, a jury-rigged set 
long-term recuperative care for critically injured of infrared goggles, an explosive that detonates if 
characters. After each day of granting long-term background radiation drops below a certain level… 
recuperative care, roll 2d6 per patient treated; on these things match known TL4 tech.
a 12, the kit has run out of some vital pharmaceu- In these cases, the GM should set a plausi-
tical and has become useless. ble-seeming price in credits or spare part units, 

Metatool: This wrist-mounted housing contains a myr- assign a time ranging from fifteen minutes to a 
iad of small, useful tools designed to handle the month based on the complexity of the tech, and 
widest possible range of technical needs. While roll a secret Int/Fix check against a difficulty from 
a metatool is too limited to handle major jobs, it 8 to 12. When the tech is actually used, the skill 
is usually sufficient to manage jury-rigged repairs check determines whether it functions or not. 
and temporary fixes until the tech has time to ap- Most such jury-rigged tech works only once, 
ply a larger wrench to the problem. being too fragile or quirky to last more than a 

Spare parts: This is a general category for a number scene. Repeated refinement and testing may allow 
of small TL4 components and repair materials. for a more lasting piece of equipment.
While a simple toolkit or metatool is often enough 



General Equipment •75 

Field Equipment cube’s side, it immediately expands to an opaque, 
When venturing into the trackless void every adven- waterproof ceraplast sheet 2 meters on each side 
turer is going to need the right hardware to survive and a centimeter thick. Five minutes later the cer-
the experience. The field equipment in this section in- aplast hardens into a tough, rigid shape, but until 
cludes some of the more common technology favored then it can be folded or bent by hand. Instapanels 
by explorers and fearless investigators of alien worlds. can be bonded to one another with a metatool or a 
The TL5 equipment listed here can usually be found for toolkit. Breaking an instapanel requires inflicting 
sale on populous worlds with an active commerce in at least twelve points of damage on it.
pretech relics, but smaller or more backwards worlds Low-light goggles: These goggles provide a mono-
may not have any of it available. chrome but serviceable view out to the wearer’s 

normal visual distance, provided that there is any 
Atmofilter: This face mask can filter out most atmo- illumination available at all. A type A power cell 

spheric toxins. Attaching a standard vacc suit ox- will operate these goggles for a week.
ygen bottle to a belt-mounted feed will also supply Navcomp: A combination of low-tech compasses, au-
a breathable atmosphere for up to six hours. tomappers, astronomic charts, and gyroscopes 

Backpack: TL4 versions of this item are effectively packed into a flat, one-kilo case. A character with 
without encumbrance, albeit they cost 50 credits. a navcomp will never get lost on worlds with GPS 
A worn backpack counts as a readied item, though satellites. They can also make a crude but service-
objects stowed inside it still require the usual able automatic map of all buildings or landscapes 
round to dig free. Characters without backpacks they travel through. Other terrestrial navigation 
or similar carrying devices might have difficulty skill checks are made at a +1 bonus.
justifying the hauling of large amounts of gear. Portabox: A small cube of ceraplast attached to an elec-

Binoculars: Standard 7x50 binoculars. TL4 versions are tronic keycard. When a type A power cell is in-
available that have integral low-light optics and serted, the portabox immediately unfolds into a 
up to 25x150 power. TL 4 binocs cost 200 credits rigid locker with 1.5 x 1 x 1 meter dimensions. 
and require a type A power cell for up to a week The portabox is air-tight and has a simple elec-
of regular usage. tronic lock which can only be opened with the 

Climbing harness: A collection of straps, ropes, pitons, keycard or a successful difficulty 8 Sneak or Fix 
and other climbing aids that grant a +1 bonus on skill check. Failing the check will cause the lock 
any Exert climbing skill test. Using a climbing to short-circuit and seal the box until it can be cut 
harness is noisy, and any Sneak skill checks while open with a metatool or broken open with twenty 
climbing with one suffer a -2 penalty. points of damage.

Glowbug: A palm-sized disc that can adhere to any Pressure tent: This tent maintains a breathable atmo-
non-porous surface. When turned on, it emits sphere, tolerable temperature and serviceable 
a white light, illuminating everything within ten sleeping quarters for up to five very friendly oc-
meters for twenty-four hours. A hundred glow- cupants. Advanced filtration and cracking tech 
bugs can be recharged off a single type A cell. allows a single standard vacc suit oxygen tank to 

Grapnel launcher: This launcher fires a rope up to for- provide breathable air for the occupants for up to 
ty meters. The rope can bear up to a metric ton 24 hours. The tent requires a type A power cell for 
of weight, though extremely heavy weights or a each day in which this filter is employed.
precarious hit can cause the grapnel to pull free. A Rations: Dried or otherwise preserved foodstuffs suffi-
Type A power cell fuels six shots from a launcher. cient for one day. If water is not otherwise avail-

Grav chute: When this cylinder is strapped to a person able, add another item’s worth of encumbrance 
or object and activated, it smoothly modulates fall- for the water necessary for a person’s daily needs.
ing speeds for up to 1000 meters. The chute can Rope: Light and sturdy. A metatool can be used to cut 
safely slow up to 300 kilos of weight. TL5 versions and join the synthetics used in TL4 rope, which 
can operate from orbital heights and cost 1,000 counts as one encumbrance item per 40 meters 
credits, where they can be found at all. Both ver- and costs 40 credits.
sions burn out after one use. Scout report: A collation of survey scans and merchant 

Grav harness: This advanced gravitic harness allows reports on a particular lost world or isolated col-
clumsy flight at a rate of 20 meters per round as ony. Scouting reports are available for all but the 
a Main Action. It requires a Type B power cell most unknown worlds and provide maps, basic 
to fuel it, and the miniaturized electronics are information, and note any critical cultural taboos.
rapacious, consuming the cell in five minutes of Survey scanner: A multipurpose scanner that can take 
operation. It can lift up to 200 kilos. atmospheric and gravitic readings, provide basic 

Instapanel: In its compressed form, an instapanel is a chemical analysis of samples of up to one cubic 
two-kilo cube of ceraplast five centimeters on a centimeter in size, and record up to two hun-
side. When a type A power cell is inserted in the dred hours of video information or ten times that 



76• General Equipment

amount of audio. Know skill checks are necessary 
for any but the most basic analysis. Local Brands

Survival kit: A standard belt-worn kit with fire lighter, The equipment described in this section matches 
water filter, three thermal flares, knife, thermal standard TL4 hardware from the average modern 
blanket, a brightly-colored 3 x 3 meter waterproof space-faring world. A PC who buys a generic vacc 
tarp, a glowbug, and a radio beacon that can trans- suit can expect it to work the way it’s listed here.
mit a distress signal up to fifty kilometers for one Not all worlds have identical tech, however, 
month on the included type A power cell. Survival even if they share a tech level. Planets with par-
kits sold on a particular world will usually also in- ticular natural hazards or technological focuses of-
clude a small booklet on specific dangers or edible ten have significantly better tech for dealing with 
organics. Possession of a survival kit grants a +1 to these things than their neighbors, while worlds 
all relevant Survive skill checks, assuming its con- that lack vital resources or industrial infrastruc-
tents are helpful on a given planet. Survival kits ture might have considerably worse gear.
are well-organized, and count as only one item for As the GM, don’t hesitate to brew up local 
encumbrance purposes. tech that can be used as a reward for PCs or a 

Telescoping pole: Retracting to a 30-centimeter baton, special buying opportunity. The gear might grant 
this pole extends and locks into a 3.048-meter skill bonuses, function longer, do more damage, 
extension that can bear as much as a thousand have an AC bonus, or offer some other perk. Such 
kilograms of weight or serve as a makeshift club. unique hardware can add flavor to a world’s tech.

Thermal flare: If triggered in one mode, the flare burns 
with a bright white light for two hours, illuminat-
ing up to twenty meters around the holder. If the Vacc suit: The standard TL4 vacc suit is designed to 
guidance fins are extended first, the flare launches allow the wearer to survive in both hard vacu-
up to 200 meters and explodes in a bright white um and on most inhospitable planetary surfaces. 
flash. A launched flare does 1d6 damage to anyone The suit protects against ordinary levels of cosmic 
it hits, though the clumsy flight gives a -4 penalty radiation and provides a temperature-controlled 
on any attempts to hit something with it. atmosphere. Vacc suits are equipped with radios 

Trade goods: Glowbugs, ceramic fire lighters, anti- that have a ten-kilometer range. A vacc suit ox-
biotics, ceraplast tools, and the other fruits of a ygen tank weighs 1 encumbrance, included with 
TL4 civilization that might be valuable on more the weight of the suit, and functions for six hours.
primitive worlds. A kilo of trade goods can usually 	Vacc suits are cumbersome, and apply a -2 
be traded for at least a hundred credits worth of penalty to all hit rolls and skill checks that re-
local products on more primitive worlds that are quire movement. Those with at least a month of 
not well-served by interstellar merchants. The zero-gee experience can ignore this penalty. No 
profit margin shrinks rapidly as interstellar trade armor can be worn with a vacc suit, though the 
becomes more common, and there is always the suit itself grants AC 13 to its wearers. A vacc suit 
difficulty of finding local products that are actually requires one type A power cell for each twelve 
worth a merchant’s journey. hours of operation. 

Trade metals: The fruit of common TL4 asteroid min- 	Vacc suits have a self-healing exterior that 
ing, trade metals include gold, platinum, artificial can seal the puncture wounds caused by bullets, 
gemstones, and other substances precious on arrows, or energy beams, but a strike from an 
many lost worlds and trivially valuable on space- edged weapon can overwhelm the repair system. 
faring ones. A kilo worth of trade metals can If a character with 10 or fewer hit points is struck 
be exchanged for as much as a thousand credits by an edged weapon, there is a 50% chance the suit 
worth of local products on metal-poor worlds iso- is torn. Suits are equipped with emergency repair 
lated from interstellar trade. Markets flood rapidly, patches, but it requires a Main Action to apply one. 
however, and it usually doesn’t take more than a Exposure to vacuum is described on page 58.
few merchant trips to persuade the locals to de- Vacc skin: A more advanced TL5 version of the vacc 
mand trade goods or credits. suit, this skin-tight suit can be worn as a readied 

Vacc fresher: This three-kilo tube filters and compress- item in conjunction with armor, though it grants 
es atmosphere to refill vacc suit oxygen tanks. It no Armor Class bonus itself. It requires no ox-
can extract oxygen from any atmosphere which ygen tank, automatically cracking and recycling 
contains it, even in the form of carbon dioxide. the wearer’s respiration, and can even recycle the 
Refilling a standard vacc suit tank requires ten wearer’s bodily waste into drinkable water if nec-
minutes of operation and consumes one type A essary. Vacc skins apply no penalty to hit rolls or 
power cell. Most vacc freshers are also equipped skill checks for wearers. It suffers tears in the same 
with an emergency hand crank power source, way as a normal vacc suit, and requires a type A 
though it requires at least two hours of cranking. power cell for each 24 hours of operation.



Lifestyles, Employees, and Services •77 

Lifestyles, Employees, and Services

Adventurers who spend much time in a place are likely 
to need to buy food, shelter, and the usual trifles of Lifestyle Cost/day

daily living. Rather than itemize each expense, a PC Slum 5
can simply spend an fixed amount for each day they Poor 10
spend living outside of a ship’s crew, barracks, or other Common 15
arranged living situation.

Slum lifestyles reflect bare minimums for survival, Good 25
with scanty food, a corner in a squat somewhere, and Elite 200
little else. Poor lifestyles involve barracks-like quarters, Peerless 1,000
public transport, and small and infrequent luxuries. 
Common lifestyles usually allow for a private urban personal staff, and similar perks. Peerless lifestyles are 
apartment or rural home, a rented personal vehicle, a similar to that of pampered celebrities and oligarchs, 
respectable wardrobe, and regular small indulgences. with round-the-clock staff service, free entrance into 
Good lifestyles permit a private urban townhouse or the most exclusive locales, and the best of everything.
similar dwelling, a spacious rural home, a better grade Prices given here assume short-term rentals and 
of personal vehicle, and the ability to indulge in minor contracts, plus the inevitable premium charged to out-
expenses such as restaurants or clubs without concern. siders in almost any society. Natives might be able to 
Elite lifestyles allow for entire floors of luxury buildings enjoy a given level of lifestyle for only half as much, 
or rented rural estates, drivers and on-call gravflyers, but such savings usually rely on a local’s connections.

PCs will sometimes need to hire help, and GMs occa- Employee Wage/day

sionally need to know what constitutes a “good wage” Artist 3/10/100
for a local NPC. The prices to the right reflect daily Programmer 10/30/100
wages for NPCs with level-0, level-1, and level-2 skill 
ratings in their relevant professional skills. More tal- Doctor 50/100/400
ented employees cannot normally be obtained without Guard 10/20/150
special effort in finding and recruiting them. Lawyer 10/25/400

Psychics are both rare and expensive to hire. Even Prostitute 2/10/200
if one can be found, they rarely charge less than 200 
credits per day per psychic skill level to be employed. Psychic Special

Employees will carry out ordinary duties without Scientist 10/30/100
demur, but will be no braver or more dedicated than Technician 10/30/100
their pay and connections would make them. Unskilled Labor 2/8/15

Adventurers often need to obtain certain services or 
Service Cost

concessions from the locals, and the list to the right 
provides prices for some of their more common needs. Bribe, minor crime forgiveness 50

Bribe prices often vary depending on a planet’s Bribe, major crime forgiveness 500
general level of corruption, but the prices here are nor- Bribe, capital crime forgiveness 5,000
mal for most. Minor crimes usually involve anything Forged identity papers 500
that would only earn a fine or a few months in jail. 
Major crimes include most felonies and anything that Intensive medical care 200/day
would earn years in prison. Capital crimes are any that Mail message, interstellar 1/hex
would get a culprit executed on the world. Particular- Mass transit weekly pass 2
ly blatant or sensitive offenses might be impossible to Rent a TL4 workshop 100/day
solve with mere bribery, though the right “special fa-
vors” to the right officials might win a reprieve. Rent a groundcar 15/day

Forged identity papers include high-quality docu- Starship passage, steerage 500/hex
mentation with the appropriate false database entries. Starship passage, good 1,000/hex
They’re good enough to survive checkpoints and secu- Starship cargo shipping, per kilo 25/hex
rity stops, but they won’t hold up to a serious check by 
a suspicious bureaucrat. Wildly decadent party 100/person



78• Vehicles

Vehicles

Most modern TL4 worlds rely on electrically-powered Actually hitting the vehicle is automatic if the 
gravitic vehicles. Whether in the ubiquitous gravcar, vehicle is stationary and within 30 feet. Hitting a ve-
hovercycle, or high-altitude gravflyer, cleared road- hicle-sized target from beyond that range requires an 
ways carry the traffic of countless worlds. On rougher attack against AC 10. If the target is moving, subtract 
worlds, the roads may not even be paved, instead rely- its Speed from the hit roll, and if the attacker is in a 
ing on a gravitic vehicle’s high clearance to avoid holes moving vehicle as well, also subtract their Speed.
and rough debris. Hit Points indicate the amount of damage a vehicle 

Less sophisticated worlds are still reliant on inter- can take before it is destroyed. Speed is reduced by half 
nal-combustion engines. Many worlds have sufficient when the vehicle is at half hit points, and flying vehicles 
local resources to fabricate some kind of combustible must land at the first opportunity. A vehicle reduced to 
fuel, but a few are so impoverished that they lack even zero hit points forces all crew and passengers to make 
this minimal resource. Such worlds must rely on mus- Physical saving throws. Failure means that the passen-
cle power for transport, either that of alien beasts or ger takes the vehicle’s maximum hit points in damage, 
humble human porters. while success reduces the damage by half.

Crew gives the maximum number of vehicle occu-
Vehicle Statistics and Combat pants. For the listed vehicles, only one crew member is 
Vehicles are generally powered by type B power cells on actually necessary to drive or pilot the vehicle, though 
TL4 worlds. More primitive planets are usually forced additional crew members may be required to fire.
to use some form of biofuel unless they’re fortunate Tonnage is the shipping weight of the vehicle for 
enough to have a supply of fossil fuels. Vehicles require ship loading purposes.
one cell or one refueling per six hours of operation, Tech Level indicates the minimum tech level for 
assuming they don’t have convenient power access. constructing the vehicle. Vehicles can be built at higher 

Vehicles are generally limited to reasonably flat, tech levels for better performance, but most worlds 
dry terrain. Grav vehicles such as hovercycles can ig- prefer to simply build more advanced vehicles.
nore rough terrain and calm water, as can ATV explor-
ers. Most grav vehicles can boost more than 10 meters Vehicle Weaponry
above the ground or water; gravflyers are purpose-de- Most vehicles larger than a motorcycle or hovercycle 
signed aircraft capable of hovering and VTOL. can mount some kind of integral weapon. Groundcars 

Speed is an abstract measure of the vehicle’s speed and gravcars can mount one weapon, while ATVs, 
and agility. When vehicles chase each other, the op- helicopters, atmoflyers, and gravflyers can mount two. 
posing vehicle’s Speed should be applied as a penalty Gravtanks are specialized weapons platforms, and can 
to Pilot skill checks to close or escape. Speed may also mount six.
be used as a modifier when attempting difficult maneu- Heavy weapons take up more space than ordinary 
vers or trying to avoid a peril on the road. ranged weapons, and each such system takes up the 

Armor is subtracted from all weapon damage done space of two lesser guns.
to the vehicle. Armor does not apply to damage done Every weapon requires its own gunner, and all 
by Heavy weaponry; such guns are often designed to mounted weapons use Shoot as the firing skill, though 
take out vehicles. Gravtanks in particular are immune the GM might allow Pilot to be used for a nose-mount-
to anything short of TL4 Heavy weapons, while less ed weapon aimed by the operator. Gravtanks are 
sophisticated tanks are immune to anything below TL3 equipped with advanced targeting systems, and all of 
Heavy ordnance. their weapons can be targeted and fired by one gunner.

Vehicle Cost Speed Armor HP Crew Tonnage TL

Motorcycle 1,000 1 4 10 1 1 3
Groundcar 5,000 0 6 30 5 10 3
Hovercycle 5,000 2 3 10 1 1 4
Gravcar 20,000 2 4 25 5 10 4
ATV Explorer 15,000 0 8 40 8 25 3
Helicopter 25,000 3 6 20 6 50 3
Atmoflyer 30,000 4 8 25 6 50 3
Gravflyer 40,000 5 8 25 6 50 4
Gravtank 200,000 2 Special 50 3 50 5



Vehicles •79 

Types of Vehicles terrain as easily as a grav vehicle, they’re designed 
Every world has its own brands of common vehicles, to take a tremendous amount of punishment before 
but the types below cover the more usual models. The breaking down and support repairs using basic tools 
prices given for each reflect a mid-range new vehicle and frontier expedients.
sold to a PC with few local contacts. Natives who know Helicopters are used on TL3 worlds where a lack 
the right people or are willing to buy used or “quirky” of airfields or treacherous local terrain prohibits the 
vehicles might be able to get one at half that price. use of fixed-wing craft. Their ability to hover over an 

area or drop onto a tightly-constrained landing zone 
Motorcycles can navigate urban terrain that would makes them particular favorites of quick-response mili-

block larger vehicles, but more rural landscapes can tary forces and groups in need of fast fire support. This 
prove more difficult. Hovercycles are the TL4 equiva- model represents a medium-weight civilian craft that 
lent, capable of brief boosts of up to 10 meters above might be repurposed by militia or adventurers.
the ground and the easy navigation of all but thick for- Atmoflyers are the fixed-wing aircraft used on 
ests or sheer slopes. planets too primitive to have developed gravitic tech-

Groundcars are the TL3 analogs of the vehicles nology. Faster and simpler to maintain than compara-
commonly in use on 21st-century Earth, allowing for ble helicopters, they can also carry more cargo on most 
some minor variations in electronics and capabilities. worlds. The need for clear, hard terrain for landing and 
Primitive buggies of various kinds are found even on take-off limit their use on some rugged worlds. The 
higher-tech worlds, thanks to their ease of construction model here is meant to represent a small personal jet.
and maintenance compared to the delicate gravitics of Gravflyers are the usual long-distance transport 
more modern vehicles. on most TL4 worlds. Large enough to support the gra-

Gravcars are the standard personal vehicles of vitics required for true flight, a few models can even 
most TL4 worlds, though most lower-class citizens reach low orbit. All can hover and climb with typical 
rely on public transport in urban areas. Most advanced gravitic ease. This particular gravflyer is a small craft 
worlds have planetary transit grids that allow occu- suitable for a affluent owner and their family.
pants to simply code in a destination and let the car take Gravtanks make up the bulk of a prosperous TL4 
them there. On worlds where a lack of infrastructure world’s armored forces. Private ownership is strictly 
or hostile local conditions preclude such convenience, forbidden on most worlds, but “export models” often 
manual controls and Pilot skill can be used. can be acquired for transport offworld. Gravtanks have 

ATV Explorers are rugged vehicles, either wheeled armor heavy enough to ignore all damage from con-
or tracked, and driven by type B power cells or local- ventional small arms, and can only be harmed by Heavy 
ly-available biofuels. While they can’t navigate rough weapons or properly-placed demolitions charges.



80• Drones

Drones

In the far future, it’s often more convenient to send 
an expendable grav-flying probe into danger before Drone Types and Statistics
venturing less repairable assets. Well-prepared adven- Each drone has a cost, a maximum number of fittings, 
turing groups often have reason to pack along a drone an Encumbrance weight for carrying it along, a hit 
or two for exploring and aerial recon. point rating, a maximum control range, and a mini-

Military use of drones is limited by the ubiquitous mum tech level. Drones may be attacked as any other 
use of quantum ECM. The easy confusion of electronic object and will crash once reduced to zero hit points.
navigation makes it impossible to control an unwired Primitive drones represent the best flying portable 
drone remotely on a modern battlefield or in proximity drone technology for TL3 worlds. While fragile, weak, 
to important civil structures, but in the alien wilds or and short-ranged, they are also relatively cheap.
away from urban centers, drones remain a feasible tool Void Hawks are unique in being built specifical-
for explorers and conquerors of primitive militaries. ly for deep-space use. Unlike other drones, they can 

operate perfectly well in space, though they only have 
Piloting a Drone the range to reach relatively adjacent ships or objects.
Piloting a drone requires either a cybernetic drone con- Stalker drones are the default TL4 workhorses of 
trol link as described on page 83 or a handheld control drone-kind and are available on most modern worlds.
unit that comes with the drone. A control link can pilot Cuttlefish are specifically designed for aqueous use, 
up to one drone plus the user’s Program skill at any and function only in a liquid medium. The support of 
one time. Handheld units can pilot only one. Drones the liquid allows them to carry significantly more fit-
consume one type A power cell for every hour of use. tings, but the need for a sonar-based navigation system 

A pilot must spend their Main Action each round limits their available range.
to command the drone to either move or shoot. Un- Ghostwalkers are stealth drones, fabricated from 
commanded drones remain stationary if piloted via radar-transparent materials. They have an integral Sen-

control link, while handheld units run a 2-in-6 chance sor Transparency fitting and the sensor difficulty to spot 
of crashing a drone if the operator fails to control them. them is 11 instead of 9.

In combat, drones fly at 30 meters per round on Sleeper drones are built to tarry on station for 
their pilot’s turn in combat. Out of combat, they can long periods. They have the Stationkeeping fitting as 
manage up to 100 kilometers per hour. an integral part of their design, and when hovering 

Spotting a drone at observation range is a Wis/ their power use slows to a trickle. One day of hovering 
Notice skill check at difficulty 10. A drone close enough draws only five minutes worth of power from its cell.
to engage a target can be spotted at difficulty 8. Any Pax drones are some of the most common pretech 
secure facility will have sensors capable of detecting drones remaining in existence, as they were favored by 
a civilian drone as soon as it gets within observation the Mandate Fleet for pacifying troublesome worlds 
range, unless the drone has stealth fittings. that lacked quantum ECM. While primitive by pretech 

standards, they still far excel most modern drones.
Drone Combat The Alecto model of drone examples one way that 

A drone’s pilot can activate up to one weapon the drone pretech scientists attempted to sidestep the limits of 
is carrying as part of their Main Action to control it quantum ECM on the modern battlefield. Every Alecto 
each round. Weapons all use Intelligence as the con- is a full-fledged VI, an expert system so sophisticated as 
trolling attribute, and use the better of the pilot’s Pilot to seem almost sentient. Its self-reinforcing cognition 
or Program skills as the relevant weapon skill. The allows it to operate even when cut off from external 
drone shoots using the pilot’s base attack bonus. signals by quantum ECM. Salvaged Alectos have all 

exhibited “female” personalities.

Drone Model Cost Fittings AC Enc HP Range TL

Primitive Drone 250 1 12 2 1 500 m 3
Void Hawk 5,000 4 14 6 15 100 km 4
Stalker 1,000 3 13 2 5 2 km 4
Cuttlefish 2,000 5 13 2 10 1 km 4
Ghostwalker 3,000 2 15 3 1 5 km 4
Sleeper 2,500 4 12 2 8 100 km 4
Pax 10,000 4 16 4 20 100 km 5
Alecto 50,000 4 18 4 30 5000 km 5



Drones •81 

Drone Fittings and Repair Drone Fittings Cost TL

Aside from the basic drone chassis, operators can attach Ammo Unit 250 4
different fittings to a drone to add additional capabili- Bomber 500 3
ties. Once attached, a fitting cannot be removed with-
out causing severe structural damage to the drone. If Environmental Power 4,000 4
a drone is destroyed, all fittings are destroyed with it. Expert System 5,000 4

If a drone is damaged, it can be repaired fully with Extended Flight 250 3
one unit of spare parts per five hit points lost and an Grav Muffles 2,000 4
hour’s work by someone with at least Fix-0 skill.

Heavy Lift 2,000 4
Ammo Unit: The drone carries one power cell or maga- Holoskin 3,000 4

zine worth of ammunition for each of its onboard Medical Support 2,000 4
weapons, whether single or multiple. The oper- Observation Suite 250 3
ator can reload an ammo unit as a Main Action.

Bomber: The drone is fitted to drop up to two gre- Racing Gravitics 2,000 4
nade-sized explosives, one or both in lieu of a dif- Reinforced Structure 1,000 4
ferent weapon attack. Dropping a grenade from Sensor Transparency 5,000 4
more than 30 meters up automatically causes the Stationkeeping 1,000 4
grenade to scatter from its intended target point.

Environmental Power: The drone draws operating Suicide Charge 250 3
power from sunlight or thermal variances. It can Weapon Fitting 1,000 4
operate indefinitely so long as it can draw power 
from its environment. Observation Suite: All drones are wired for basic camera 

Expert System: The drone is loaded with sophisticat- and sound, but this suite contains a full-spectrum 
ed self-piloting software. It can be given a flight UV/IR visual package, remote sound sensors, and 
plan by its operator, have targets designated for radiation/chemical detectors. The drone can focus 
its weapon, and respond to simple environmental on conversations or facial expressions from up to 
cues. Each new command takes up a Main Ac- 2 kilometers away and can operate even in the 
tion and commands with any conditional states complete absence of visible light.
may require an Int/Program skill check to get the Racing Gravitics: The drone is tuned for extra speed. Its 
drone to understand. The drone can fire only one flight endurance is halved, but it can now move 
weapon per round and uses a total attack bonus of up to 60 meters per combat round and fly at up to 
+2 if attacking autonomously. Quantum ECM will 200 kph out of combat.
scramble this lightweight system. Reinforced Structure: The drone is equipped with 

Extended Flight: The drone can now carry a second type heavier plating and a sturdier internal frame. Its 
A cell to fuel its flight. This fitting can be taken hit points are increased by 50%, rounded up.
multiple times to further extend its range. Sensor Transparency: The drone is sheathed in anti-ra-

Grav Muffles: The drone is made exceptionally quiet in dar composites. Ordinary sensors will not detect it 
operation. It is now inaudible by ordinary hearing at observation range, and high-end military sen-
from more than five meters away. sors can spot it only on an Int/Program check at 

Heavy Lift: While most drones can lift no more than difficulty 9.
a kilogram of excess weight, the drone’s gravitic Stationkeeping: The drone does not need to be con-
units have been upgraded to carry up to twenty stantly controlled; when the operator does not 
kilos of cargo. This can be fitted multiple times. spend a Main Action to pilot it, it simply remains 

Holoskin: The drone can drop a filmy hologram over it- stationary. If equipped with an Observation Suite, 
self, one convincing at a distance. The difficulty of it can ping the operator if any anomalous reading 
visually spotting the drone becomes 10 at weapons is obtained.
range or 12 at observational range. Weapons fire Suicide Charge: The drone is loaded with a demo charge 
always draws attention. as per page 69. The operator can trigger it as an 

Medical Support: The drone can be loaded with up to attack, but unless they can move the drone in by 
a dozen units of medication, whether stim doses, surprise, the approach will always give onlookers 
lazarus patches, or less benevolent substances. It a chance to spot it before it gets within range.
can launch a medication through a remote injector Weapon Fitting: The drone can be mounted with 1 
at a target within ten meters in lieu of a weapon encumbrance worth of ranged weaponry, which 
attack. Immobile or willing targets are hit auto- must be purchased separately. This fitting may be 
matically, while hostiles require a normal hit roll. taken more than once to mount more weapons 
The drone is treated as having Heal-0 skill or the or heavier weapons. The weapon requires one or 
active pilot’s Heal skill, whichever is higher. more ammo units to feed it.



82• Cyberware

Cyberware

Postech medical science and neural interface technol-
ogy are sophisticated enough to meld metal and flesh 
into a coherent whole. The creation of advanced cy-
berware is not beyond the theoretical capability of TL4 
societies, and pretech worlds can produce cyberware 
of such sophistication as to blur the lines between or-
ganism and artifice.

Yet cyberware is rarely available on most worlds, 
even those with the nominal technology level to sup-
port it. The advantages that cyberware can give a user 
are great, but the cost of building, fitting, and implant-
ing these devices is huge compared to simply buying a 
handheld device to do the same function. There are few 
buyers for a 15,000 credit ghost talker implant when a 
compad retails for a hundred credits.

The market that does exist is largely for those few 
elite operatives and dignitaries who are willing to pay 
exorbitant sums for the smallest advantage. Most cy-
berware is custom-built for its users, and it can be an 
adventure in itself to find a lab capable of manufac-
turing an augmentation and successfully implanting 
it. Some worlds have industrialized the production of 
cyberware, however, making it much cheaper and in 
much wider circulation. Even then, these worlds rarely 
export much cyberware due to the heavy infrastructure 
necessary to fit and implant the wares. Those who want 
the tech will have to find such planets and do their own 
negotiations there.

Aside from the difficulties of cost and scarcity, 
cyberware also taxes the wearer’s body. Each piece of Bioadaptation Augments: These additional synthetic 
cyberware comes with a System Strain cost as described organs and filters allow the bearer to survive in 
on page 32, permanently adding that many points of thin-atmosphere conditions, as well as tolerate 
System Strain to the user’s total. These points can never temperatures ranging from Antarctic chill to 
be lost unless the system is surgically removed. This heat sufficient to boil water. They can also eat a 
permanent System Strain decreases the amount of wide range of native life forms for sustenance; no 
psionic healing a character can sustain and can limit normal planet’s native biology is ever considered 
the effectiveness of healing and stimulant drugs. immiscible for consumption.

Some cyberware has an activation cost in System Body Arsenal Array: Some personnel need to be armed 
Strain. If a cost would push the character’s System at all times without giving any indication of such. 
Strain above their Constitution score, they cannot Improvised weaponry and conventional holdout 
trigger the cyberware; their body just can’t handle the weapons are useful enough against soft targets, 
strain until it has had time to recover. but disabling a target in powered armor requires 

more. The details of the array vary from user to 
Adrenal Suppression Pump: These endocrine pumps user, but usually act as advanced medium weapons 

neutralize numerous brain chemicals in the user that can be used with either Punch or Stab skills 
when activated while exciting the user’s percep- and at least one integral energy projector equal 
tual centers. This combination produces a cold, to a laser rifle, one that must be powered by an 
dispassionate situational awareness that grants insertable type A power cell. Retracted body arse-
the user +2 on initiative rolls when the system is nals can be detected only by a medical examination.
engaged. Most systems have built-in safety over- Body Sculpting: Not so much a single implant as a se-
rides to prevent psychological addiction and brain ries of complex surgeries, body sculpting is avail-
damage, allowing the unit to be used for no more able on many TL4 worlds with fairly advanced 
than an hour each day. The user takes a -2 penalty medical services. After a week of alterations and 
on all social skill checks while the unit is active, treatments a subject’s external appearance can be 
and it requires five rounds to toggle it. set within any human or near-human range, in-



Cyberware •83 

Cyberware Cost Strain TL

Adrenal Suppression Pump 30,000 1 4 Eliminates emotion and improves initiative

Bioadaptation Augments 10,000 1 4 Survive near-habitable planetary conditions

Body Arsenal Array 10,000 1 4 Provides retractable body weaponry

Body Sculpting 10,000 1 4 Complete external physical reconstruction

Dermal Armor 20,000 2 4 AC 16, immune to primitive weapon Shock

Drone Control Link 20,000 1 4 Allows easier remote control of drones

Eelskin Capacitor Mesh 25,000 1 4 Allows bare-handed hacking and electrical shocks

Gecko Anchors 15,000 1 4 Can climb sheer surfaces as if they were flat

Ghost Talker Transceiver 15,000 1 4 Integral compad with audiovisual transmission

Holdout Cavity 10,000 1 4 Shielded body cavity for holdout storage

Holoskin Emitters 15,000 1 4 Creates a hologram around the user

Identity Submersion Trigger 25,000 1 4 Allows a false identity to be perfectly assumed

Immunofiltration System 25,000 2 4 Immune to almost all diseases and poisons

Induced Coma Trigger 20,000 1 4 Feigns death and halts bodily processes for up to two weeks

Neurointruder Alert 50,000 1 5 Grants +3 to save vs. telepathy, alerts of intrusion

Panspectral Optics 15,000 1 4 Integral low-light and thermal vision

Pressure Sheathing 15,000 1 4 Integral emergency vacc suit

Prosthetic Limb 2,500 1 4 Replaces a limb lost to misadventure

Revenant Wiring 50,000 3 5 Keeps the user fighting even after they’re dead

Slowtime Window 30,000 2 5 Prevents surprise and speeds up the user’s cogitation

Stabilization Overrides 25,000 2 4 Automatically stabilizes a mortally-wounded user

Tagger Nanites 15,000 1 4 Lets the user tag others with tracking nanites

Toxin Injector 20,000 2 4 Allows surprise injection of lethal or dazing toxins

Twitchlock Actuators 30,000 2 4 Allows brief moments of hyper-precise accuracy

cluding full retinal and fingerprint matching to a single drone can only receive one command per 
desired target. A TL5 version of this treatment round, however.
that costs ten times as much can involve exten- Aside from this ease of command, someone 
sive DNA reprogramming to change the subject with an implanted rig can “look” through a piloted 
at a genetic level, making their alterations herita- drone’s sensors as an Instant action, and a drone 
ble and allowing female-targeted shapes to bear is never considered to be out of control even if 
offspring. This TL5 treatment is not reversible, the pilot doesn’t spend an action controlling it. A 
and any further major alterations to the subject link can maintain a connection with one drone at 
require further permanent System Strain. a time, plus the user’s Program skill.

Dermal Armor: A fine subcutaneous reinforcement Eelskin Capacitor Mesh: A hair-fine mesh of almost im-
mesh provides significant protection against im- perceptible wiring along the user’s palms and fin-
pacts and cuts while remaining imperceptible to gers allow them to trigger brief, controlled bursts 
anything short of a medical examination. Some- of electrical energy at targets within five meters. 
one with the implant has AC 16 and is immune As an Instant action it adds 2d4 non-lethal damage 
to Shock damage inflicted by primitive melee to a successful Punch attack. In its intended use, it 
weapons. A TL5 version of this implant that costs also allows the user to override and disable most 
five times as much grants even more protection, electronic locks and security systems with a suc-
rendering the subject wholly immune to primitive cessful Sneak or Fix skill check. Both triggering a 
weapons as if they were wearing powered armor. burst and hacking a security system tax the user’s 

Drone Control Link: Most often found among military biology; one System Strain point is gained with 
bot wranglers, civilians can also get a drone con- each attack or skill check.
trol link implanted to simplify the remote piloting Gecko Anchors: Miniaturized gravitic manipulators are 
of drones and other robotic units. embedded in the subject’s hands and feet as part 

Users of a link can issue commands to a drone of this complex surgery. While they are too weak 
as a Move action instead of a Main Action. A to allow levitation or damping fall damage, they 



84• Cyberware

can twist localized gravity around those limbs to persona, a conviction that cannot be penetrated by 
anchor the subject to the nearest surface capable telepathy or TL4 methods of interrogation. The 
of bearing their weight. As a result, the user can persona can be activated at the user’s discretion, 
freely run or climb up or down sheer surfaces at but it only deactivates on a preset trigger, leaving 
their normal movement rate, carrying no more the subject in full possession of all memories expe-
than their normal maximum encumbrance. rienced. The trigger can be any perceptible stimu-

Ghost Talker Transceiver: Some people simply cannot lus: a particular time, the sight of a specific person, 
afford to be out of contact at any time, under any a code phrase, or any other sign, and it may be 
circumstances. Those people find use for the mi- changed by the user each time they activate the 
crofine web of radio wiring and optical augmen- cyberware. Many ISTs are also implanted with a 
tation that make up the ghost talker. These units “master key” that will automatically deactivate the 
act as a built-in compad for the user and allow triggered identity.
for reception and transmission of audio and visual Immunofiltration Systems: This broad-spectrum scrub 
recordings, the latter playing in an inset window system carefully identifies and contains toxic sub-
in the user’s field of vision. If the unit is operating stances introduced into the user’s system. When-
outside of a standard comm grid, it has a trans- ever the subject would normally have to make a 
mission range of twenty kilometers and a recep- saving throw to resist some disease or toxin, they 
tion range of one hundred. Ghost talker users can may instead gain one System Strain to automat-
transmit basic visual diagrams and images to each ically succeed on the save. Most of these systems 
other, as well as optical recordings. are calibrated to automatically filter any toxins 

Holdout Cavity: Usually implanted somewhere in the or chemicals in standard use by police or military 
torso, a holdout cavity is a small recess shaped forces in the sector, but if presented with a spe-
into the wearer’s body and designed to be over- cial biowarfare toxin, the filters are less effective. 
looked by most standard forms of medical or se- In such cases, the most it can do is either grant a 
curity scanning. It automatically defeats a security second saving throw if the first is failed, or grant 
inspection that uses less than TL4 scanners, and a single saving throw if none is normally allowed. 
even advanced tech requires careful personal in- Induced Coma Trigger: A series of implants are wired 
spection to have a chance of revealing it. The cav- to the user’s brain stem, allowing them to trigger 
ity can hold an object up to the size of a pistol and an induced therapeutic coma at a mental com-
is opened and shut by the user’s mental command. mand. The user appears dead to anything short 

Holoskin Emitter: Multiple holographic emitters are im- of a medical inspection, and has no need of respi-
planted on the user, allowing them to alter their ration, food, or water while the coma is in effect. 
external appearance to match anything of their The user does not heal while in a coma, but any 
approximate size and dimensions, including oth- diseases or poisons also halt progression. The user 
er people. Shifting appearances is a Main Action, determines how long the coma is to last before 
and the user can’t shift to an appearance that isn’t triggering it, and is unconscious for its duration. 
in the cyberware’s shape library. The library is vast A character can survive in a coma up to two weeks 
and contains “generic” examples of numerous hu- before needing to regain consciousness for as long 
man-sized objects and people, but mimicking a as they were in the coma.
specific other person requires at least five minutes Neurointruder Alert: While somewhat primitive by 
of close examination. The holograms projected pretech standards, this TL5 cybernetic implant 
by the emitters are good, but imperfect; anyone allows the wearer to gain a +3 bonus on all saving 
who closely examines the user will be able to tell throws to resist telepathic intrusion. Even if such 
that something is artificial about their appearance, a save is failed, the user will be aware that they 
and touch instantly confirms any suspicions. The are under telepathic assault, though some forms of 
emitters can fake clothing and can produce sounds mental control may not allow them to say as much 
to complement the illusion or modify the user’s until after the influence is ended. The warning 
voice, if records of the true subject are available. does not indicate the source of the influence.
The disguise lasts until the user dies or ends it. Panspectral Optics: Ocular adjustments to the wearer 

Identity Submersion Trigger: This cyberware involves allow them to see clearly at any light level short of 
micronized neural stimulation technology which perfect darkness, in addition to giving them ther-
is imperceptible to anything short of TL5 medical mal vision that can easily distinguish shapes and 
scanning or TL4 surgical examination of the sub- distance even in the total absence of light. Danger-
ject’s brain tissue. When active, the IST allows the ous radiation and lasers tuned outside the range 
subject to adopt a secondary persona, complete of visible light are also visible to the user. Nearby 
with a library of manufactured memories. So long radio transmissions can be seen as if they were 
as the IST is active, the subject will honestly and visual flares of color. The system cannot translate 
completely believe himself to be the secondary these transmissions, only alert the user to them.



Cyberware •85 

Pressure Sheathing: Occasionally purchased by work- Stabilization Overrides: An intricate interweaving of 
ers in hard vacuum or other hostile environments, microcapillaries and backup organs is implanted 
pressure sheathing integrates an ultrathin pres- in the subject’s torso and spinal column. These 
sure membrane with the user’s dermis and emer- overrides can stabilize the user when severe phys-
gency film sealants that trigger at the user’s mental ical trauma would otherwise kill them. A user re-
command. The pressure sheathing serves as an duced to 0 hit points is automatically stabilized, 
emergency vacc suit with an integral oxygen sup- as if a Lazarus patch had been successfully applied 
ply and temperature regulators that can sustain to them, assuming that a patch could have saved 
them for up to thirty minutes. A pressure sheath them. Stabilization overrides tend to interfere 
needs 48 hours to regain structural integrity and with the ordinary operation of the user’s organs, 
power after triggering. A pressure sheath can be however, and the wearer’s Constitution modifier 
detected only by a close medical examination. is lowered by 1, with all the attendant consequenc-

Prosthetic Limb: Hands, feet, arms, legs, eyes, and es in loss of maximum hit points.
numerous internal organs can be replicated by Tagger Nanites: While true nanotechnology is beyond 
postech medical science. These prosthetics can the grasp of standard TL4 science, this cyber al-
provide a good approximation of the sense of lows for the implantation of very simple nanofac-
touch, and are usually impossible to distinguish tories in the user, ones that exude a constant im-
from ordinary limbs without close inspection. perceptible “smart dust”. Objects the user touches 
Pretech-level worlds tend to prefer actually re- can be tagged by these nanites, which generate 
generating lost limbs, but those with access only more of their kind for up to 48 hours after tagging. 
to ordinary frontier levels of tech have reason to The dust then lays down a trail behind the tagged 
be grateful to prosthetics. object, one that is visible to the user or to some-

Revenant Wiring: One of the more grotesque results of one using a properly-keyed tracer. Only count-
late pretech augmentation research, revenant wir- er-nanite measures can remove the dust, as ordi-
ing permeates the user’s body with a web of sup- nary bathing or scrubbing is insufficient. The dust 
plementary limb actuators and sensor clusters. In can be pinged by radio to announce its location 
combat, the user may designate up to a half-dozen to anyone within five kilometers, but most users 
targets to the system’s braked micro-AI. If the user prefer to leave the dust in passive mode, where it 
goes unconscious or is killed, the micro-AI will is undetectable to most TL4 sensors. Tagging an 
engage the limb actuators to keep fighting, even object adds one System Strain to the user.
if the user is nothing more than a ragged mass Toxin Injector: The user’s canines or fingernails are 
of mangled tissue. The micro-AI is not brilliant, altered to allow for the injection of one of two 
but it is capable of negotiating most terrain and types of poison. If the user attempts to inject an 
dealing with physical impediments to killing the unsuspecting victim they are already touching, the 
designated targets. The actuators have power to attempt is automatically successful. If the victim is 
keep operating for 3d4 rounds, or until the wear- wary or in combat, they can only be affected if they 
er takes 25 more hit points of damage, whichev- are unarmored and the user succeeds in a Punch 
er comes first. The stress produced by revenant attack roll. On a success, the victim must make a 
wiring makes it much more difficult to revive a Physical saving throw at -2 or be incapacitated by 
downed user with Lazarus patches or biopsionics; the poison, dying in 1d6 rounds or being incapac-
all revivification chances are half normal. itated for 1d6 hours at the user’s discretion. Each 

Slowtime Window: A piece of cutting-edge pretech cy- poison attack adds 2 System Strain to the user.
berware, the slowtime window was installed in Twitchlock Actuators: Neural override fibers are wo-
crisis responders and others reliant on split-sec- ven into the user’s hands and arms and linked to a 
ond decision making. When engaged, the implants perceptual modulator implanted at the base of the 
accelerate the user’s cogitation speed by more than user’s brain stem. When presented with a direct 
three thousand percent. While there is no corre- exercise of hand-eye coordination, the twitchlock 
sponding acceleration of the user’s physical reflex- can be engaged to produce superhuman accuracy 
es, they have time to process the situation and take and precision. Any attack roll or skill check reliant 
in its details. A person who triggers a slowtime chiefly on manual dexterity or aim can be rerolled, 
window cannot be surprised; they always roll ini- though the power surge inflicts two points of Sys-
tiative as normal no matter how unexpected the tem Strain on the user. A given roll can only be re-
attacker. This brain acceleration is highly stressful rolled once with this cyberware. While the twitch-
on the tissues, however, and one point of System lock allows superhuman accuracy when engaged, 
Strain is gained each time it is engaged. the overrides fuzz ordinary nerve impulses and 

reduce the user’s Dexterity modifier by 1 when 
active. Activating or deactivating the cyberware 
requires a Main Action.



86• Artifacts

Artifacts

Pretech artifacts are some of the more precious loot Ghost Mantle: Designed for use by elite infiltrators, a 
available from lost Mandate military bases, abandoned ghost mantle can warp light around the wearer to 
colonies, desolate tomb worlds, and forgotten research blur his or her outlines and coloring to match the 
outposts. Most pretech on modern worlds was long surroundings. The mantle can self-modify in one 
ago cannibalized for vital spare parts or destroyed by minute to appear as any normal suit of clothing 
the ravages of time and violence. The few pieces that and grants AC 15 to the wearer. When used in 
remain are almost always extremely valuable. stealth mode, it grants a +2 bonus to all Stealth-re-

Very few pretech artifacts are bought or sold. lated skill checks. TL4 sensors and scanners cannot 
Some items are relatively common, having been ubiq- detect the mantle as anything but ordinary cloth.
uitous enough to survive in large numbers or simple Polyplast Carapace: This variant form of assault suit 
enough to be produced by a few remaining modern employs pretech deforming polymers to create 
worlds. Most artifacts, however, are so rare that there sealed joints and flexible armor plates that still 
is no consistent market for them; an owner can charge maintain rigidity under impact. A polyplast cara-
what they wish for a device. pace is treated as an assault suit with AC 18, except 

Getting that price is a different matter. Few plan- that it counts as only one item for encumbrance 
etary governments allow private ownership of “dan- and requires no practice to use correctly. Integral 
gerous pretech artifacts”, and it’s the government that kinetic absorption sinks allow the armor to func-
decides what constitutes danger. Most owners are rap- tion without the need for power cells.
idly visited by firm, polite agents with heavily-armed Psitech Combat Suit: One of the rare psitech artifacts 
backup and given a “fair price” for their find. originally designed for use by military combat 

As a consequence, most trade in pretech artifacts psychics, this snug-fitting armored undersuit 
has to take place on the black market, or on worlds or grants the wearer an AC of 16. Its special ability 
stations too lax to care about who might be bringing functions only for psychics; it can allow the user 
in a portable black hole generator that just happens to reflexively fuel the suit’s defenses with their 
to look like a Mandate child’s toy. Such venues rarely own psychic reserves. As an Instant action, they 
provide much in the way of security or contract en- can Commit Effort for the day to negate up to 
forcement, and so trade has to take place amid grasping 15 points of damage from in incoming source of 
guards, paranoid participants, and regular theft. physical injury. Each time they do this, they must 

Pretech artifacts are more often traded privately make a Mental saving throw or the psychic con-
as rewards, mission payments, or exchanges between version shock leaves them unable to use psionic 
owners. A PC who wants to obtain one of the artifacts techniques until after the end of their next turn.
listed in this section will need to not only find someone Stutterjump Suit: A modified version of the standard 
who will admit to possessing the gear, but also find out deflector array, a stutterjump suit grants the wear-
what kind of favor they’re going to need to part with it. er a limited form of teleportation through integral 
Tens of thousands of credits can sometimes do the trick, psitech circuitry. As an Instant action, the wearer 
but most owners will prefer to wring the maximum can teleport to any location within one hundred 
utility out of a capable adventurer’s interest in their meters, provided they have an unobstructed line 
prized possessions. of sight to it. The suit’s circuitry requires twelve 

hours to recover enough for another jump. The 
Artifact Armor suit does not require power cells to function.
Many types of pretech armor are so rare or useful that Titan Powered Armor: An enormously heavy suit of ser-
they cannot normally be acquired on the open market. vo-actuated powered armor, Titan assault plate 
Much like artifact weaponry, these artifact armors are was favored by pretech boarding parties and space 
jealously held by those lucky enough to find them. marines. It grants the wearer all the usual benefits 

of storm armor, but has a base AC of 21 and sub-
Executive Security Suit: This suit of stylish pretech tracts 2 points of damage from every instance of 

clothing can self-modify in one minute to appear harm suffered by the wearer.
as any normal suit of clothing and grants AC 15 Tempest Assault Array: A modified version of the field 
to the wearer. Originally designed for VIP pro- emitter panoply, the TAA has all the functionality 
tection, the executive security suit automatically of the FEP but also does an automatic 1d6 dam-
stabilizes a mortally-wounded wearer provided age to anyone who attacks the wearer in melee, 
they haven’t taken enough damage to make reviv- inflicting the damage after the attack is resolved. 
al impossible. Like the majority of pretech artifact The wearer is immune to Shock damage. Kinetic 
armor, the suit is so light that it does not add to sinks allow the TAA to function without the need 
the wearer’s encumbrance. for power cells.



Artifacts •87 

Artifact Weaponry and versatility of their firearms. Their guns were 
While generic pretech weaponry is of superb quality largely self-repairing from anything short of hav-
and manufacture, some pieces exceed even the custom- ing pieces torn off, and their projectile weapons 
ary excellence of the ancients. These “artifact” weap- automatically self-adjusted to fire whatever am-
ons are usually the product of short production runs munition was available, in any environment from 
by master pretech craftsmen or individually-designed hard vacuum to underwater operations. A Colo-
masterpieces. Some pre-Scream manufacturers retain nial Arms projectile or energy weapon also gains 
fame even centuries later for the unique quality of their a +1 bonus to hit and damage rolls.
workmanship. Convergence Weaponry: Those weapons designed by 

Artifact weapons are almost never found on the the transhuman hive-mind polity known as the 
market. The few pieces that are found and offered for Convergence are almost always energy-based guns 
sale are snapped up almost immediately by elite opera- found in sets of 2-5 matching weapons. Wielders 
tives and others who rely on the quality of their hard- can nominate a target as an Instant action at the 
ware to preserve their own lives. Most who have arti- start of each round; any attacks they make with 
fact weaponry have either found it in a long-abandoned the weapon against that target get a +1 hit and 
pretech cache, received it from a superior, or taken it damage bonus for each wielder that targeted the 
from the cold hands of a former owner. Selling such a foe, including their own nomination.
weapon tends to be equally difficult, with buyers few Imperial Arms: Ornate and beautiful weapons created 
and untrustworthy. shortly after the horror of the Scream, these arms 

were developed by an unknown pocket empire 
Absolution Armaments: A company specializing in ener- that somehow preserved a little of their pretech 

gy weaponry, AA pioneered several techniques for manufacturing base. Their attempt to reimpose 
increasing the energy efficiency and penetrating order on the chaos around them appears to have 
power of their armaments. AA laser weapons ig- failed, but their legacy lingers in the scattered 
nore particulate matter when shooting, and all AA weapons that remain from their far-flung armies. 
weapons gain +1 to hit and +2 damage. An Imperial weapon grants its user a +1 bonus 

Colonial Arms: An armaments company dating from to all hit and damage rolls, with projectile weap-
the First Wave of human colonization, Colonial ons having an unlimited supply of ammo. These 
Arms was famous for the incredible durability weapons always remain immaculately clean.



88• Artifacts

Fiat Lux: This manufacturer specialized in laser and a wielder with the weapon in hand can take an 
plasma weaponry. Their products were largely additional full round of action any time they 
conventional in function, but the quality of crafts- wish. At the end of this bonus action, they suffer 
manship was seldom surpassed. Fiat Lux weapon- 1d4 System Strain, +1 for each use of this ability 
ry grants +2 to hit rolls and damage. within the past 24 hours. If their System Strain is 

Nightfall Combine: The exact nature of the Nightfall maximized by this, they fall unconscious for one 
Combine was unclear even before the Scream, hour. Tempus Fugit weapons have a +1 bonus to 
with rumors of alien xenotech manufacturing hit and damage.
techniques and esoteric psitech materials research. Terminus Est: A sister-company to Tempus Fugit, the 
The weapons produced by the Combine were Terminus Est line of advanced melee weaponry 
some of the finest ever developed by humanity. employed spatial distortion technology. As an 
They grant +3 to all hit and damage rolls. Instant action at the start of a round, a wielder 

Omnipresence, Ltd.: A pretech manufacturer who spe- with the weapon in hand can nominate a visible 
cialized in holdout weaponry, Omnipresence arms target; for the rest of the round, they’re treated as 
are composed of special polymorphic nano-com- if they’re adjacent and engaged in melee combat 
pounds that are capable of shifting shape in mo- with the target, hindering ranged attacks, subject-
ments. Omnipresence weaponry can take a single ing them to attacks if they move away without a 
alternate shape of the same mass set during man- fighting withdrawal, and so forth. The wielder is 
ufacture, usually a belt, necklace, or other seem- not subject to attacks by the target unless they ac-
ingly innocuous object. When gripped and a short tually are within range of the target’s weapons. By 
keycode is spoken, the item instantly shifts forms, straining the wielder’s perception pathways, this 
containing whatever ammunition it was original- target nomination can be applied to a number of 
ly loaded with. Shifted Omnipresence weapons targets equal to the wielder’s Stab skill plus two. 
cannot be detected by any postech means; even Any attack made against one target is applied to all 
a pretech scanner will only reveal that the object nominated targets, using the same die rolls. Each 
is composed of complex nanites. Omnipresence round this multiple nomination is maintained, the 
weapons grant +1 to hit and damage rolls. wielder takes 2 System Strain. All Terminus Est 

PolyGaia Defense: Originally an organization of mili- weapons have a +2 bonus to hit and damage rolls.
tant pan-planetary animists, PolyGaia armaments Tools of Ill Omen: A specialist weapon line designed by 
function perfectly in almost any environment. sage-engineers affiliated with the Preceptors of 
Projectile and energy weapons are also equipped the Great Archive, the Tools are decorated with 
with integral monoblades, and can be used as ad- taotie-motif fittings similar to those of Shang 
vanced medium melee weapons without a need to Dynasty bronzes. Tools usually appear as melee 
club the weapon. PolyGaia weaponry grants +1 to weapons, particularly halberds, dagger-axes and 
hit and damage rolls. swords, though stylized hypervelocity repeating 

SamaelTech: The Sons of Samael were one of the myr- crossbows have been found that work like mag 
iad peculiar religious and ideological groups that rifles with unlimited ammo. The Tools function 
flourished during the Second Wave of human with a +2 hit and damage bonus
expansion. While their exact beliefs are unclear Valiance Arms: Somewhat stodgy by pretech standards, 
at this distance, their surviving melee armament Valiance never embraced the more exotic poten-
is invariably superb. Monoblades, kinesis wraps, tials of pretech science. The company instead 
and other such SamaelTech weaponry all have +1 preferred to focus on precision low-recoil pro-
to hit and +1 damage. Some SamaelTech weap- jectile weapons and high-quality craftsmanship. 
ons appear to be decorated with Christian ico- Valiance projectile weapons grant +2 to hit and 
nography and advanced nanotech cutting surfaces. damage rolls.
These pieces grant +2 to hit and damage. Windcutter: Windcutter armaments are invariably 

Stardust Micropellet System: The “Stardust” system was edged melee weapons. Their pretech manufactur-
a cutting-edge effort to use gravitic manipulation ers had an obsessive interest in maximizing weap-
techniques in projectile weaponry. By giving a on penetration, one carried to an extent that was 
tiny flake of matter the mass profile of a bullet, a very impressive, if perhaps somewhat impractical 
Stardust weapon never runs out of ammunition, for field use. A Windcutter blade can slice through 
albeit Stardust weaponry cannot burst fire. Star- any substance short of advanced pretech armor 
dust weaponry gains +1 on all hit and damage rolls. plating, inflicting full normal damage on vehicles, 

Tempus Fugit: The weapons of the Tempus Fugit ar- including gravtanks or other targets subject only 
mory employed Mandate temporal acceleration to Heavy weapons. For Shock purposes, all tar-
generators. Such acceleration is exhausting to gets are treated as if they were AC 10. Against all 
the user, however, and creates severe strain on targets, the blades have an effective +1 bonus to 
a normal biological system. As an Instant action, hit and damage.



Artifacts •89 

Artifact Equipment ing standard pretech CAD/CAM protocols, the 
AI Companion: True AI was never easily made by pre- nanites exude into the desired object, mimicking 

tech scientists. AIs required individual care during any necessary physical properties. The nanites can 
their development, and a disturbing percentage of be used to create any object of equivalent or less-
them had to be “braked” at sub-human levels in er mass, provided a datapad or the equivalent is 
order to prevent runaway cogitation on impon- available to feed them the schematic. The nanites 
derable philosophical questions and the ensuing are single-use, but multiple cylinders can be linked 
metastatic insanity that followed. Some AIs man- together to create larger objects. The workman-
aged to attain a human level of sentience before ship of the nanites is good, but not exceptional; 
requiring brakes. The less brilliant of these AIs any available schematic of tech level 4 or less can 
could be contained in hardware no larger than five be produced.
or six centimeters on a side, usually with integral Pseudonuke: While conventional TL4 nuke snuffers 
sensors and vocalization units. If an AI companion make dangerous nuclear reactions impossible 
takes a liking to a PC, they can be useful allies; they near spaceships or modern civil defense systems, 
all have effective Program and Fix skills at level 3 a pseudonuke is designed with esoteric pretech 
or greater, and may have additional capabilities. parts and techniques to bypass TL4 defenses. Most 
A distressing number of these AIs have their own pseudonukes are no larger than a briefcase but can 
purposes, however, that are not necessarily com- detonate with enough force to wipe out a large 
plementary to those of their “owners”. city or space station. The handful created before 

Integrity Stims: Usually found in the form of a skin- the Scream were deniable Mandate tools to deal 
spray applicator, integrity stims restore 2d6+2 hit with rebel frontier colonies. Those that survive 
points to a subject for each dose applied. Each dose are spectacularly illegal on almost all worlds.
increases the target’s System Strain by 1 point, and Redivivus Sheath: When found, a redivivus sheath re-
the stims are useless to those with maximized Sys- sembles a tightly-rolled body bag with a fist-sized 
tem Strain. More than one dose can be triggered computing module affixed to it. When a fresh-
into a subject in one round, but each dose after the ly-dead human body is sealed into the bag the 
first adds an additional second System Strain point module releases a cloud of nanites to repair and 
from the sudden overload of stimulants. revive the subject. Revivification will work on any 

Juggernaut Stims: Originally designed for pretech shock victim no more than five minutes dead, assuming 
troops, this skinspray stimulant charges the user the head is intact and most of their mass is present. 
with fearless aggression and indifference to pain. Subjects are revived in critically wounded condi-
The user immediately gains 3d6 temporary hit tion with maximized System Strain. The redivivus 
points and +2 to hit for a period of ten rounds. At sheath functions only once before burning out.
the end of that period, any remaining temporary System Reset Inductor: An array of pretech pharmaceu-
hit points are lost, and the subject suffers -2 to hit ticals of truly heroic breadth, a sprayhypo full of 
for the next hour as their system recovers. Use of system reset inductor is one of the most powerful 
this stim adds 1 point of System Strain. concoctions ever devised by pretech biochemists. 

Micropurgator Stims: A sprayhypo laden with a revivi- On injection, the subject immediately loses all ac-
fying cocktail of nanites and support chemicals, a crued System Strain points barring those perma-
micropurgator stim will remove 1d4 points of ac- nently added by cyberware. The user can gain new 
crued System Strain from the user. Only one such System Strain normally, but 48 hours after the in-
stim can be applied to a person within 24 hours. ductor has been administered, the strain will catch 

Mindwall Helmet: A transparent-visored helmet, this up with them. They fall immediately unconscious 
headpiece strengthens the integrity of the wearer’s with 1 hit point and maximized System Strain, and 
neural patterns, making it more difficult for them will remain in a coma for 48 hours before awaken-
to be influenced by mind-affecting psionic powers. ing. Use of a second inductor before the first has 
The wearer gains a +2 saving throw against any run its course will inevitably kill the subject within 
such attack, and is automatically alerted by the five rounds of application, with no hope of revival 
helmet if made the target of a telepathic power. by psionic disciplines or conventional medical aid.
The helmet does not help against purely physical Wideawake Serum: Originally designed to facilitate 
psionic attacks, such as through telekinetics, and spike drills for single-man ships that couldn’t af-
it cannot be worn with powered armor, vacc suits, ford a sleeping pilot, wideawake serum gives the 
or an assault suit. user enormous vigor and alertness for up to seven 

Polymorphic Nanites: Usually found in two-kilo cyl- days at a time. The user need not sleep or even rest, 
inders with integral input-output data ports, but during this time it is impossible to recover 
polymorphic nanites were a late-Second Wave accrued System Strain. A successful Heal check at 
development that promised to revolutionize difficulty 10, made at most once per day, can flush 
manufacturing. When fed a design schematic us- the drug from the user prematurely.



90• Modding and Building Equipment

Modding and Building Equipment

While truly sophisticated research and design often install it in the desired device. Thus, a Customized mod 
requires resources beyond the reach of an adventuring takes a week to put in, while a Flexible mod takes two. 
party, more modest workshops can allow a talented If a tech does nothing other than work, eat, and sleep, 
technician with a healthy supply of after-market parts they can halve these times, and an additional assistant 
to improve the quality of their own or their allies’ gear. with at least Fix-0 skill can further halve the time.
Without a full-fledged R&D department behind them, Mods must be custom-built to specific objects. A 
a PC technician is generally limited to modifying and tech cannot build a “generic” mod and then just attach 
improving existing gear. it to a device; it must be carefully designed to fit exact-

A mod is an adjustment made to a specific piece ly with that specific item, and sometimes even with a 
of tech to make it work better. These mods are finicky, specific user.
delicate, and often customized to the user. They aren’t 
generally available on the market because they require Mods and Maintenance
regular tuning and adjustment by a highly-skilled tech- Mods require maintenance to keep functioning cor-
nician in order to keep them from degrading, or even rectly. Overclocked hardware, bleeding-edge tech, and 
failing entirely. Mods require costly after-market parts experimental adjustments just don’t have the field dura-
that can be expensive to acquire, and the most sophisti- bility of more standard gear, so a tech must apply daily 
cated ones require actual pretech salvage stripped from attention to the modded hardware if it’s not to fail. A 
advanced ancient technology. Normally, only TL4 gear normal TL4 toolbox is required to maintain mods, but 
can be effectively modded, as more primitive tech isn’t no special parts are needed.
suitable for the advanced components involved. A tech’s Maintenance score is equal to the total of 

their Intelligence and Constitution modifiers plus three 
Installing Mods times their Fix skill level. The smarter and the longer a 
Building and installing a mod requires a well-equipped tech can work, the more maintenance they can perform, 
TL4 workshop. It’s not necessary to have a full-fledged but their overall expertise as a technician is the most 
fabrication plant, but the sort of resources that a pro- crucial element. A tech can maintain a number of mods 
fessional repair tech or vehicle shop have are necessary equal to their Maintenance score without cutting into 
to assemble and adjust the tech. Such a shop can usually their adventuring time or otherwise encumbering their 
be rented for 100 credits a day, or bought outright in a off-duty hours. This maintenance is assumed to take 
city or other urban area for 25,000 credits. A starship’s place during downtime and doesn’t need to be tracked 

“Workshop” ship fitting will also qualify. specifically in play. If they do nothing but maintenance, 
Mods have a minimum Fix skill required to install they can double their score, but this kind of dedication 

or maintain them; a Customized mod requires Fix-1, for requires sixteen-hour workdays.
example, while a Flexible mod takes Fix-2. Without this If a mod goes without maintenance for 24 hours, it 
skill level, the tech can’t build or install the mod, and stops working. If a mod goes without maintenance for 
they can’t maintain it properly either. a week, the entire device it’s attached to stops working, 

Mods have a cost in credits or salvage. A tech with as the untuned mod has made it useless or dangerous to 
access to a normal TL4 parts market can buy compo- use. Weapons can no longer be used in combat, armor 
nents with a credit cost, but certain highly sophisticated no longer gives protection, seizes up, or is too danger-
mods require pretech components that can only be sal- ous to wear, and other devices simply stop functioning. 
vaged from certain ancient Mandate-era technological A maintenance backlog on a device can be cleared by an 
devices. Not just any device will do for gathering these hour of work by a technician capable of maintaining it.
components; these micronized fusion taps, antigrav 
nodules, impact flexors, and polymorphic state con- Building Conventional Gear
trollers are found in only certain Mandate tech or in Sometimes a wrench jockey will want to build their 
rare ancient caches of unused components. A tech will own equipment rather than purchase it off the shelf. 
usually have to find these components as part of an This may be because there’s no such gear for sale, the 
adventure, because those who have them need them equipment is illegal on this world, the tech wants it 
for their own purposes and will not part with them for cheaper than the vendors sell it, or the tech wants 
ordinary monetary compensation. The specific details to build a custom platform for their favorite mods. 
of these parts don’t matter for mod use, and they’re sim- The gear built this way must be feasible to create in a 
ply tracked as “salvage”. If a mod requires three units of workshop; guns, armor, and modestly-sized vehicles 
salvage, any three units will work, and it’s not normally are possible, but starship components and other major 
necessary for a tech to track down specific components. constructions are not.

Mods take time to build and install. It takes one A tech requires a TL4 workshop to build most TL4 
week per minimum skill level of the mod to build and equipment. More primitive gear can be built with less 



Modding and Building Equipment •91 

elaborate resources at the GM’s discretion. The work- Sample Mods
shop must be at least nominally capable of working with The mods listed below are simply a sample of those a 
the kind of gear the tech is building. A vehicle repair GM might approve for their campaign. Weapon and 
shop will not have the tools to brew pharmaceuticals, armor mods should not stack beyond a +3 bonus to AC, 
and a back-room electronics shop won’t have the lifts hit rolls or damage rolls, and any mod improving a skill 
to work on armored vehicles. If the tech needs to refit a check shouldn’t boost it by more than +1. A mod can 
workshop to work on a particular type of unsupported only be installed once on any given piece of equipment.
gear, they can pay half the shop’s original price to get 
the needed tools. Starships with Workshop fittings are Autotargeting (Fix-2): The weapon has had micronized 
always sufficient for personal gear modifications. kinetic targeting aids installed, granting a +1 bo-

The tech needs a supply of parts. In any TL4 city nus to hit rolls with it. Costs 4,000 credits.
or sizable community, the tech can scrounge, barter, Boosted (Fix-2): The weapon has been tuned for greater 
or buy what they need from the locals. A tech working damage output, adding +2 to the damage it does. 
in a shop out in the wilds can prepare by taking a few Costs 2,000 credits.
footlockers full of materials that can fit in a vehicle or Bubbleseal (Fix-1): The armor is equipped with auto-
on pack animals, buying a certain number of credits matic pressure seals and emergency oxygen. It can 
worth of spare parts and hauling them along. Techs in be triggered manually or activates automatically 
dire need can strip ancient high-tech ruins, battlefields, on exposure to low pressure, functioning as a vacc 
and scrap heaps for parts if no better source is available. suit for up to one hour. Costs 5,000 credits.

Techs must decide whether the device they’re Concealed (Fix-2): The device is disguised as a specific 
building is to be jury-rigged, normal, or mastercrafted. different object of the same general mass. This 
Jury-rigged devices are assembled out of cheap scrap, disguise will fool standard TL4 sensors, but not a 
bottom-tier components, and makeshift kludges. close physical inspection of the object. Costs ten 
They’re much cheaper to make than to buy, but they re- times the device’s base cost.
quire constant attention to keep them operating. Nor- Customized (Fix-1): The weapon or armor has been 
mal devices work just as well as anything that you’d buy carefully tailored to a single specific user. When 
off the shelf, but the lack of economies of scale and the used by that person, they get a +1 to hit with the 
need to acquire all the parts at retail make them more weapon or a +1 Armor Class bonus with armor. 
expensive than buying it off the shelf. Mastercrafted Costs 1,000 credits and is inapplicable to shields.
gear is carefully built to support a tech’s own innova- Extended Magazine (Fix-1): The firearm has been ad-
tions and favorite modifications. They are extremely justed so that its magazine size is doubled. Costs 
expensive, but much easier to mod and maintain than 500 credits.
off-the-shelf tech. Flexible (Fix-2): The armor is carefully tailored to a 

Building the gear usually takes one month for a specific wearer with an eye towards reducing its 
vehicle and one week for a weapon, suit of armor, or weight and cumbersomeness. Its Encumbrance 
other portable device. Having at least one assistant with value is lowered by 1 for that wearer, and in-
Fix-0 will halve this time. creased by 1 for anyone else. Costs 5,000 credits.

Jury-rigged devices cost one-quarter as much as High Efficiency (Fix-1): A device with a duration of 
the normal device and take half the normal time to operation, such as a vacc suit or fueled vehicle, 
build. If the tech has access to scrap or salvage, they now functions for 50% longer on the same charge. 
can assemble it at no cost, but it takes twice the normal Costs five times the device’s usual cost.
time to build it. A jury-rigged device counts as a mod Infinite Magazine (Fix-3): The firearm now automati-
requiring Fix-0 to maintain. If it goes 24 hours with- cally produces its own physical ammunition. Costs 
out maintenance, it stops working. Jury-rigged devices 10,000 credits and two units of pretech salvage.
cannot be modded. Infinite Power (Fix-3): A device powered by a Type A 

Normal devices cost twice as much as they would power cell now never runs out of power. Costs 
off-the-shelf and take the normal amount of time to 5,000 credits and one unit of pretech salvage.
build. They cannot be built with scrap or salvaged parts Phasing (Fix-3): The weapon is tuned to partially phase 
unless the GM decides that the salvage is perfectly suit- through armor and impeding debris, granting a +1 
ed for this use. Drugs and other consumable goods must bonus to hit rolls with it. Costs 10,000 credits and 
be built as normal devices rather than jury-rigged or two units of pretech salvage.
mastercrafted ones. Polymorphic Blending (Fix-2): The armor can shift in 

Mastercrafted devices require costly premade appearance to that of normal clothing or differ-
components and cost ten times as much as the normal ent-looking armor. Several dozen different ap-
device, and require twice as much time to build. They pearances can be loaded into it at any one time. 
are ideal platforms for the tech’s own modifications, The armor functions and encumbers normally 
however, and the first mod installed in the device re- regardless of its external appearance. Costs 5,000 
quires no maintenance. credits and one unit of pretech salvage.






STARSHIPS
Countless ships rise from world upon world, the iron Military hulls are a different matter. Even a lowly 
dust of new-forged shipyards sent out to make bridg- patrol boat is rarely permitted to a civilian buyer, let 
es between the stars. For centuries, the privation and alone a fleet cruiser or other ship of the line. Even when 
chaos that followed the Scream have made any concern these ships can be purchased, crewing them adequately 
beyond bare survival a luxury for all too many worlds. can be far beyond the limits of an adventuring par-
The last century has seen a reawakening, however, as ty’s purse. Even so, heroes who make the right friends 
myriad planets finally unlock the secrets of their own or do the right favors to a planetary government can 
worlds and learn to use their native resources to rebuild sometimes get letters of marque that entitle them to 
the long-lost ships of their ancestors. The Silence is purchase hulls that would not normally be allowed into 
ending and worlds are now beginning to reach out to civilian hands.
their unknown neighbors. Buying a ship is only one way to acquire it, howev-

Different sectors have different degrees of devel- er. Many adventurers find it more efficient to liberate 
opment. In some regions of space, starships have now a craft from undeserving owners, with an evening’s 
been manufactured for centuries, with small spacecraft play revolving around the daring deeds and cunning 
easily obtained by private individuals and modest com- subterfuge needed to acquire or salvage a ship for the 
panies. These sectors have regular commerce between party. Of course, the craft acquired by this means are 
worlds, with interstellar drills no more remarkable rarely in perfect condition.
than modern air travel. Aliens and offworlder humans The ship and fitting prices that follow in this sec-
are noticed but go without special remark. These sec- tion assume that starships are uncommon and expen-
tors often have relatively large stellar polities made up sive investments, as they are in most sectors. If you are 
of numerous member stars, ones which often share the running a campaign in a region of easier access to ships, 
same general culture or political form. These sectors you should halve or even quarter the prices.
may still have backward planets or unknown worlds, 
but these are the exception. Navies and Piracy

In most Stars Without Number sectors, however, Most TL4 worlds have some sort of space navy, even if 
things aren’t that developed. Some worlds will have it’s only a handful of patrol boats to watch the asteroid 
developed or retained functional shipyards and inter- mines and monitor orbital space around their home-
stellar flight is not anything remarkable to their citizens, world. A typical poor world might have a corvette and 
but ownership of a starship is still a rare thing. Entire a half-dozen patrol boats, while the average TL4 planet 
planetary navies might have fewer than a dozen ships, sports a fleet cruiser, four corvettes or heavy frigates, 
and only powerful and influential worlds will be sport- and ten patrol boats, and a rich planet might have three 
ing cruisers or other heavy warships. There is enough times as many ships, possibly even a battleship or car-
commercial traffic to justify starports and trade stations, rier to form the heart of its fleet. A third of these ships 
but free and easy transit between worlds has been lost are usually in dock at any one time.
for centuries, and is only slowly returning to the sector. The threat of piracy varies from system to system. 

These sectors are rich in potential adventure. Even Pirates need a safe place to refit their ships and sell their 
developed worlds may not be completely familiar with stolen goods, and they need enough traffic to justify 
their stellar neighbors, and a number of lost worlds their trade. The ideal pirate system is one containing 
and out-of-contact societies can still be found in the only a low-tech primitive world that can be raided for 
sector. Starship captains can never be entirely certain slaves and supplies, with a hidden or mobile deep-space 
what they’re going to meet when they drill into such a repair base for maintenance, and two or more wealthy 
system, and no world is strong enough to exert its will neighboring systems that send trade through. Such a 
carelessly around distant stars. pirate nest can persist for years, with system govern-

ments arguing over who should bear the cost of rooting 
Acquiring Starships them out, or too weak to overcome a charismatic pirate 
In most sectors, it’s possible to buy civilian starships leader and their loot-hungry followers.
on any TL4 world. Such civilian ships are almost ex- Very few pirates operate in a system with a strong 
clusively fighter or frigate-class hulls, most usually free naval presence. Small ships can sometimes get away 
merchants or in-system shuttles, though a few wealthy with it for a time, hiding out in asteroid belts, striking 
worlds offer bulk freighter hulls as well. These ships merchants from ambush, and fleeing to safer systems 
might be armed to the extent that their buyer’s purse before help can arrive. Larger pirate flotillas are a more 
allows, but they are no match for real warships, and existential threat to a planetary navy, and they are soon 
so few planets worry too much about who might buy dispersed… or made the effective masters of the system 
them. Conspicuous acquisition of numerous armed as they blow up any ship that could prevent them from 
merchants, however, might draw unwelcome interest. obtaining space supremacy.



94• Building a Starship

Building a Starship

Creating a starship in Stars Without Number is fairly cost 100 credits a day in wages, plus 20 more for nec-
simple, and requires only a few steps. essary food and stores. PCs, naturally, are unlikely to 

First, pick a hull type for the ship from the list charge themselves wages, but they need to eat.
below. The type will indicate the price of the base hull Fourth, note down the six-month maintenance 
with a drive-1 spike drive, along with the available free cost of the ship, which is equal to 5% of its total non-
power and mass. crew cost. If this fee isn’t paid, a -1 penalty is applied to 

Second, add fittings, weapons, and defenses from all skill checks and hit rolls related to the ship for each 
the pages that follow. Each such addition takes up a maintenance period skipped.
certain amount of power and mass, and may have a Lastly, fill in a ship record for the craft, marking 
minimum hull size required for installation. Some fit- down the ship’s statistics and the attack bonuses for the 
tings and defenses cost more in money, power, or mass gunners using the ship’s weapons.
when installed on larger ships. The speed of building or modifying a ship will de-

Third, decide how many crew members the ship pend on the quality of available shipyards and the po-
will have. Most merchantmen run with no more than litical importance of the job. On average, 25,000 credits 
twice the minimum number of crew to save on wages. a day of work or modifications can be done by most 
Warships rarely leave port with less than 75% of the shipyards on average-importance jobs. Enough reason 
maximum crew allowed. On average, crew members to rush can double or even quadruple this amount.

Starship Hulls

Starship hulls are divided into four general hull classes: Crew lists the minimum crew necessary for basic 
fighters, frigates, cruisers, and capital ships. The size operation and the maximum crew the life support sys-
of each class varies depending on the technological so- tem can sustain for two months. Smaller crews than 
phistication and available resources of their creators. In the maximum will make the ship’s life support last pro-
some sectors a smuggler’s free merchant frigate might portionately longer. While it’s theoretically possible for 
measure no more than 34.75 meters from nose to tail, a lone crewman to make a successful spike drill, the 
while in another it might be four times as large. As a constant vigilance and wakefulness required mandates 
general proportion, each class’ average size is usually the use of heavy pharmaceuticals and great desperation. 
from four to eight times larger than the class before it. A minimum of three crew are normally required for a 

Each hull has several base attributes. Individual relatively safe drill.
models might vary slightly, and careful tuning and cus- Armor Class is a combination of agility and effec-
tomization might alter these numbers as described later, tive ECM denoting the difficulty of landing a solid hit 
but most ships of a given hull type will perform as listed. on the ship.

Cost is the price of the base hull with a drive-1 Power is the amount of free power available after 
class spike drive. Any military hull type is generally the ship’s basic operation is taken into account. Fittings 
unavailable without very good naval contacts with a and weapons take up some part of this power.
shipyard’s owning government or a carefully-placed Mass records the amount of free mass left unas-
favor to those in authority. signed by the hull’s design. This free mass can be filled 

Speed is the relative combat speed and maneuver- with fittings, weapons, or cargo holds.
ability of a ship. Over long distances a ship’s spike drive Hardpoints indicate how many weapons a ship can 
rating is all that matters, but in the tight quarters of successfully mount. Most weapons take up one hard-
combat this can make a great difference. A ship’s Speed point, though particularly large or power-hungry ones 
is added to all Pilot skill checks made by the craft’s pilot, may take up more than that.
whether in combat or performing other maneuvers. Finally, the class of the particular hull shows the 

Armor is the measure of the ship’s plating and re- general size of the ship. Some fittings and weapons 
dundant systems, and is subtracted from any incoming have a minimum hull class, beneath which a ship is 
damage from hostile fire or hazardous space environ- just too small to successfully install the hardware.
ments. Ship-mounted weapons with the Armor Pierc- Starship hulls are sturdy enough to ignore damage 
ing trait may ignore part or all of this rating. Ships from small arms or TL3 Heavy weapons. TL4 Heavy 
generally cannot be harmed by anything short of other weapons or demo charges applied to the exterior of a 
ship’s guns, vehicle-mounted Heavy weapons or care- ship do half damage minus the ship’s Armor. If a sab-
fully-placed demo charges. oteur gets inside with such weapons, the damage is 

Hit Points reflects the amount of damage the ship halved but Armor does not apply. Use of some Heavy 
can take before it explodes or becomes inoperable. weapons in confined areas may be decidedly imprudent.



Building a Starship •95 

Hull Types Fleet Cruiser: The favored ship of the line of most 
The hull types listed below are some of the most com- wealthy, advanced worlds, and often the biggest 
mon models found throughout the remnants of hu- and most powerful ship most planets can build. A 
man space. Individual worlds often experiment with cruiser’s heavy armor and infrastructural support 
different vessels as they gradually develop their own for heavy guns make it a lethal weapon against 
astronautic doctrines, but these models have the benefit frigates and any other ship not optimized for 
of long and proven utility. cracking heavy armor. They can prove vulnera-

ble to swarm attacks by fighter-bombers equipped 
Strike Fighter: Small craft, often modified to replace with the right kind of armor-piercing weapons.

the spike drive with a system drive. Their speed, Battleship: Dreaded hulks of interstellar war, very few 
cheapness, and combat utility make them a popu- worlds have the necessary technology or economy 
lar choice as inexpensive system patrol craft. to support the massive expense of building and 

Shuttle: The smallest craft that’s regularly used for inter- crewing a battleship. Those that do gain access 
stellar drills, a shuttle is a cheap means of moving to a ship that is largely invulnerable to anything 
small amounts of precious material or important short of specially-designed anti-capital cruisers or 
persons between worlds. hunter-killer frigates.

Free Merchant: A hull type much beloved by adven- Carrier: The queen of a fleet, even fewer polities can 
turers, a free merchant has unimpressive combat afford to build one of these huge ships. Carriers 
utility but can carry substantial amounts of cargo can support flights of fighter or frigate-class war-
while mounting enough weaponry to discourage ships, ones specially equipped to handle particular 
small-craft piracy. missions. This versatility allows it to load fight-

Patrol Boat: The hull of choice for customs cutters and er-bombers for anti-capital missions one month, 
system law enforcement, the patrol boat is a light and then switch to swarms of hunter-killer frig-
frigate built heavy enough to overawe small mer- ates the next when a hostile system’s asteroid out-
chant vessels while still being relatively cheap to posts need to be destroyed. Stripped of its combat 
build and crew. wings, however, a carrier has less individual fire-

Corvette: The smallest true combat frigate, and often power than a cruiser.
simply called a “frigate” by spacers. Corvettes have Stations: Almost every space-faring world has at least 
significantly thicker armor than patrol boats and one space station in orbit. A station has no Speed 
trade additional crew needs and less maneuver- score, no spike drive, and cannot perform any 
ability for more available free mass. maneuvers in combat, though its transit jets can 

Heavy Frigate: The heaviest starship that most poor slowly move it around a solar system over a matter 
or resource-deprived worlds can build, the heavy of weeks. Civilian trade stations allow for docking 
frigate can carry a significant loadout of weaponry by bulk freighters and ships not cleared to land on 
and has enough crew to overwhelm most pirate the surface, while military stations strictly forbid 
ships if it comes to a boarding action. While it any civilian docking. The small station listed here 
packs a substantial punch, it lacks the armor of a is a Bannerjee-12, a common model found on poor 
true cruiser-class warship. or backwater worlds with little traffic. The large 

Bulk Freighter: This class of huge cargo ship is found station represents an Arx, a major trade station for 
most often in peaceful, heavily-populated sectors. a hub world with money to spare.

Hull Type Cost Speed Armor HP Crew AC Power Mass Hard. Class

Strike Fighter 200k 5 5 8 1/1 16 5 2 1 Fighter
Shuttle 200k 3 0 15 1/10 11 3 5 1 Fighter
Free Merchant 500k 3 2 20 1/6 14 10 15 2 Frigate
Patrol Boat 2.5m 4 5 25 5/20 14 15 10 4 Frigate
Corvette 4m 2 10 40 10/40 13 15 15 6 Frigate
Heavy Frigate 7m 1 10 50 30/120 15 25 20 8 Frigate
Bulk Freighter 5m 0 0 40 10/40 11 15 25 2 Cruiser
Fleet Cruiser 10m 1 15 60 50/200 14 50 30 10 Cruiser
Battleship 50m 0 20 100 200/1,000 16 75 50 15 Capital
Carrier 60m 0 10 75 300/1,500 14 50 100 4 Capital
Small Station 5m N/A 5 120 20/200 11 50 40 10 Cruiser
Large Station 40m N/A 20 120 100/1000 17 125 75 30 Capital



96• Building a Starship

Starship Fittings

The following list of ship fittings are largely standard Auto-targeting system: Some ships run with more guns 
TL4 technologies that are available in most sectors. A than crewmen. A single NPC or PC can man one 
few items on the list are rare pretech devices that can- gun per round, firing it as often as the gunnery 
not be acquired without special connections or a lucky chief’s Fire One Weapon or Fire All Guns actions 
feat of salvage. allow, but sometimes that’s not enough. Installing 

Some costs are marked with an asterisk. These an autonomic targeting system for a gun allows it 
costs are multiplied by 10 when the fitting is installed to shoot at a +2 hit bonus without human assis-
in a frigate-class hull, by 25 when installed in a cruis- tance. This system must be installed once for each 
er-class hull, and by 100 when installed in a capital ship. gun that is to be self-manned.

Some power and mass entries are marked with a Automation support: The ship has been carefully fitted 
hashmark. These costs are multiplied by 2 for frigates, to support the use of non-sentient expert system 
3 for cruisers, and 4 for capital ships, rounded up. Note robots in its operation. At least one human, VI, 
that you apply these multipliers even if the fitting only or True AI crew member is necessary to oversee 
works on a large ship; a frigate with a Drill Course Reg- the bots and monitor spike drills, but otherwise 
ulator pays 250,000 credits, not 25,000. crew may be replaced with cheap, basic robots at 

a cost of 1,000 credits per crew member replaced. 
Advanced research lab: A lab suitable for investigating Bots don’t draw pay, don’t take up life support, 

alien xenolife, planetary geology, esoteric technol- and their maintenance is assumed to be part of the 
ogy, and other mysteries of the cosmos. The lab ship’s operating costs. These bots are incapable of 
contains cold sleep pods adequate to contain alien any actions unrelated to operating the ship and 
samples, viro-shielded research cells, high-energy are treated as level-0 in their skills where relevant.
lasers, and other requisite tools. When used to in- Boarding tubes: Armored tubes equipped with laser cut-
vestigate some phenomenon or object, any appli- ter apertures can be used to forcibly invade a hos-
cable skill rolls are improved by +1 for a frigate lab, tile ship, provided the target’s engines have been 
+2 for a cruiser lab, and +3 for a capital ship lab. disabled. Ships without boarding tubes have to 

Advanced nav computer: Forging new spike courses is send invaders across empty space to either make 
too much an art to rely on computerized assis- an assault on a doubtless heavily-guarded airlock 
tance, but an advanced nav computer can help on or cut their way in through the hull with laser 
well-mapped routes. When navigating an inter- cutters and half an hour of work.
stellar drill course with charts less than a year old, Cargo lighter: Cruisers and larger craft can’t land on 
the navigator decreases drill difficulty by 2. planetary bodies, so they require small shuttlec-

Amphibious operation: This fitting includes the benefits raft for transport. A cargo lighter is only capable 
of the Atmospheric Configuration fitting, as well as of surface-to-orbit flight, which takes roughly 
allowing the ship to operate while immersed in a twenty minutes either way, but can latch on to 
liquid medium. Submerged ships cannot be de- a standard pressurized cargo container holding 
tected with conventional planetary traffic sensors up to 200 tons of cargo and passengers. These 
and require military sonar and naval sensors to fix containers are usually collapsible and take up no 
their position, resources often unavailable on less significant space when compressed for storage, as-
developed worlds. So long as the ship stays away suming they’re not simply disposable cargo shells. 
from military naval craft and bases, it is almost This fitting can be purchased multiple times.
impossible to track while submerged. Only fighter Cargo space: Free mass can be traded for pressurized 
and frigate hull classes can mount this fitting. cargo space. Tracked by weight for convenience, 

Armory: Rather than maintaining lengthy lists of ship one cubic meter is usually one ton, with most ve-
equipment, a captain can simply buy an armory. hicles requiring ten tons when loaded, tanks tak-
Ships so equipped have whatever amounts of TL4 ing 25, and aircraft or mechs taking up 50 tons of 
military-grade weaponry and armor that a crew cargo space. One point of free mass grants 2 tons 
might require, and integral maintenance facilities of cargo space in a fighter, 20 tons in a frigate, 200 
for its upkeep. There is enough gear available to tons in a cruiser, and 2000 tons in a capital-class 
outfit the entire crew for normal use, but giving ship. This fitting can be purchased multiple times.
it away or losing it in use may deplete it. Cold sleep pods: These stasis pods can keep a subject 

Atmospheric configuration: This fitting must be put alive for centuries provided that the ship’s power 
in place when the ship is built, and cannot be doesn’t fail. Each installation allows for keeping 
installed on cruiser-class or larger ships. A ship a number of people equal to the ship’s maximum 
designed for atmospheric flight can land on most crew in stasis indefinitely. This fitting can be in-
solid or aqueous surfaces. stalled multiple times.



Building a Starship •97 

Ship Fitting Cost Power Mass Class Effect

Advanced lab 10k* 1# 2 Frigate Skill bonus for analysis and research

Advanced nav computer 10k* 1# 0 Frigate Adds +2 for traveling familiar spike courses

Amphibious operation 25k* 1 1# Fighter Can land and can operate under water

Armory 10k* 0 0 Frigate Weapons and armor for the crew

Atmospheric configuration 5k* 0 1# Fighter Can land: frigates and fighters only.

Auto-targeting system 50k 1 0 Fighter Fires one weapon system without a gunner

Automation support 10k* 2 1 Fighter Ship can use simple robots as crew

Boarding tubes 5k* 0 1 Frigate Allows boarding of a hostile disabled ship

Cargo lighter 25k 0 2 Frigate Orbit-to-surface cargo shuttle

Cargo space No cost 0 1 Fighter Pressurized cargo space

Cold sleep pods 5k* 1 1 Frigate Keeps occupants in stasis

Colony core 100k* 4 2# Frigate Ship can be deconstructed into a colony base

Drill course regulator 25k* 1# 1 Frigate Common drill routes become auto-successes

Drive-2 upgrade 10k* 1# 1# Fighter Upgrade a spike drive to drive-2 rating

Drive-3 upgrade 20k* 2# 2# Fighter Upgrade a spike drive to drive-3 rating

Drive-4 upgrade 40k* 2# 3# Frigate Upgrade a spike drive to drive-4 rating

Drive-5 upgrade 100k* 3# 3# Frigate Upgrade a spike drive to drive-5 rating

Drive-6 upgrade 500k* 3# 4# Cruiser Upgrade a spike drive to drive-6 rating

Drop pod 300k 0 2 Frigate Stealthed landing pod for troops

Emissions dampers 25k* 1# 1# Fighter Adds +2 to skill checks to avoid detection

Exodus bay 50k* 1# 2# Cruiser House vast numbers of cold sleep passengers

Extended life support 5k* 1# 1# Fighter Doubles maximum crew size

Extended medbay 5k* 1 1 Frigate Can provide medical care to more patients

Extended stores 2.5k* 0 1# Fighter Maximum life support duration is doubled

Fuel bunkers 2.5k* 0 1 Fighter Adds fuel for one more drill between fuelings

Fuel scoops 5k* 2 1# Frigate Ship can scoop fuel from a gas giant or star

Hydroponic production 10k* 1# 2# Cruiser Ship produces life support resources

Lifeboats 2.5k* 0 1 Frigate Emergency escape craft for a ship’s crew

Luxury cabins 10k* 1 1# Frigate 10% of the max crew get luxurious quarters

Mobile extractor 50k 2 1 Frigate Space mining and refinery fittings

Mobile factory 50k* 3 2# Cruiser Self-sustaining factory and repair facilities

Precognitive nav chamber 100k* 1 0 Frigate Allows a precog to assist in navigation

Psionic anchorpoint Special 3 0 Frigate Focal point for allied psychics’ powers

Sensor mask 10k* 1# 0 Frigate At long distances, disguise ship as another

Ship bay/fighter 200k 0 2 Cruiser Carrier housing for a fighter

Ship bay/frigate 1m 1 4 Capital Carrier housing for a frigate

Ship’s locker 2k* 0 0 Frigate General equipment for the crew

Shiptender mount 25k* 1 1 Frigate Allow another ship to hitch on a spike drive

Smuggler’s hold 2.5k* 0 1 Fighter Small amount of well-hidden cargo space

Survey sensor array 5k* 2 1 Frigate Improved planetary sensory array

System drive Special +1# +2# Fighter Replace spike drive with small system drive

Teleportation pads Special 1 1 Frigate Pretech teleportation to and from ship

Tractor beams 10k* 2 1 Frigate Manipulate objects in space at a distance

Vehicle transport fittings 2.5k* 0 1# Frigate Halve tonnage space of carried vehicles

Workshop 500* 1 0.5# Frigate Automated tech workshops for maintenance



98• Building a Starship

Colony core: The ship has been designed to act as the ting is selected, these numbers double. These pods 
core of a future settlement. Once this fitting is put their inhabitants into very deep hibernation 
engaged, the ship ceases to be operational as a so as to minimize the resources necessary to main-
starship, and builds out into a set of habitats, hy- tain their lives. Bringing them out of this stasis 
droponic gardens, fusion plants, and living spaces requires a month of “defrost”. Crash awakenings 
sufficient to support up to five times its maximum have a 25% chance of killing the subject. The pods 
crew, including enough fabrication and workshop are rated for 100 years of stasis, but their actual 
facilities to keep the settlement operational un- maximum duration is somewhat speculative.
der normal conditions. The settlement can be a Extended life support: The ship can be designed to ac-
deep-space hab, orbital installation, or planetary commodate a larger number of crew or passengers. 
settlement. In the latter case, the ship must land Extended life support can be fitted multiple times; 
to form the settlement; even ships without atmo- each time, the maximum crew rating of the ship 
spheric operations can do so, but they can never increases by 100% of its normal maximum. Thus, 
take off again. Once activated, a colony core can- a free merchant who installs this twice can have a 
not be re-packed. maximum complement of 18 people.

Drill course regulator: Drills along a known spike drive Extended medbay: All ships are equipped with basic 
route have no chance of failure so long as the route medical facilities for curing lightly injured crew 
is no longer than twice the operating pilot’s skill members and keeping the seriously injured ones 
level and does not involve course trimming. Thus, stable until reaching a planet. An extended med-
a navigator with Pilot-1 skill would always succeed bay improves those facilities, allowing for the 
in making a drill of two hexes or less, provided the medical treatment of up to the ship’s entire max-
route was a known one. The drill course regu- imum crew at once, including the treatment of 
lator requires a sophisticated technical base and critically wounded passengers.
compatible metadimensional energy conditions Extended stores: A normal complement of ship’s stores 
in a given sector; many sectors no longer have can keep the maximum crew size supplied for two 
this technology or lack the right environment to months. Each selection of Extended Stores doubles 
use it. If the GM prefers a campaign where space that time, and can be fitted multiple times.
travel is always at least somewhat dangerous, they Fuel bunkers: Most ships require refueling after each 
may deny access to this fitting. Ships piloted by drill jump, no matter the distance. Installing fuel 
exceptionally talented navigators may choose not bunkers allows the ship to carry one additional 
to mount it even then. load of fuel. This fitting can be installed multiple 

Drive upgrades: A ship can improve its standard-issue times for ships that wish to minimize fueling.
drive-1 spike drive with additional phase filters Fuel scoops: Fuel scoops allow for the harvesting and 
and power throughput refinements. A captain extraction of hydrogen from gas giants or the 
needs buy only the final grade of drive desired. He penumbra of solar bodies. The extraction process 
does not have to buy upgrades sequentially. Drives requires four days of processing and refinement, 
of rating 4 and higher are generally TL5 artifacts but completely refuels the ship. Such fittings are 
that cannot be built most modern worlds. common on explorer craft that cannot expect to 

Drop pod: Armored and stealthed versions of cargo find refueling stations.
lighters, these craft are twice as fast, apply a -3 Hydroponic production: Some ships are designed to pro-
penalty to tracking and targeting skill checks, and duce food and air supplies for the crew. Selecting 
can carry up to one hundred troops or passengers. hydroponic production allows for the indefinite 
Many are equipped with assorted Heavy weapons supply of a number of crewmen equal to the ship’s 
to clear the landing zone, and can be treated as maximum crew. This option may be taken multi-
flight-capable gravtanks for purposes of combat. ple times for farm ships, in which case each addi-
This fitting can be purchased multiple times. tional selection doubles the number of people the 

Emissions dampers: Stealth systems can mask the ship’s ship can support.
energy emissions through careful modulation of Lifeboats: Selecting this fitting equips the ship with 
the output. All travel times inside a star system are a number of single-use escape craft capable of 
doubled when the system is engaged, but any skill reaching the nearest habitable planet or station 
checks to avoid detection gain a +2 bonus. in a star system. If no such destination exists, 

Exodus bay: These banked rows of compressed cold the boats can maintain their passengers for up 
sleep pods are designed to carry enormous num- to a year in drugged semi-stasis. Lifeboats have 
bers of people in extended hibernation, most of- fully-functional comm systems and are usually 
ten colonists to some new homeworld or escapees equipped with basic survival supplies and distress 
from some stellar disaster. A cruiser can carry up beacons. A single selection of this fitting provides 
to 1,000 colonists in stasis, while a capital ship enough lifeboats for a ship’s maximum crew, with 
can handle up to 5,000. Each further time this fit- up to twenty people per boat.



Building a Starship •99 

Luxury cabins: Each time this fitting is selected, 10% Precognitive nav chamber: An extremely rare example 
of the ship’s maximum crew gain access to lux- of psitech dating from before the Scream, a pre-
ury cabins of a spaciousness sufficient to please cognitive nav chamber allows a character with at 
a wealthy star-farer. This fitting comes with the least Precognition-2 psionic skill to assist in inter-
usual zero-gee athletic courts, decorative foun- stellar drills, sensing impending shear alterations 
tains, fine dining, and artistic fittings. before they happen. The navigator automatically 

Mobile extractor: Automated mining and refinery succeeds on any spike drill check of difficulty 9 or 
equipment has been built into the ship, allowing less. On a failed check, add 2 to the Spike Drive 
it to extract resources from asteroids and plane- Mishap roll, limiting the potential damage. On 
tary surfaces. Careful extraction of specific lodes drilling in to the destination system, the psychic 
of valuable minerals can be quite profitable at the has expended all Effort in the process.
GM’s discretion, but if the crew is simply melt- Psionic anchorpoint: This pretech relic is unavailable on 
ing down available asteroids for raw materials, the open market in most sectors. Once installed 
the unit can refine one ton of usable materials in a ship, it can be “imprinted” by up to a dozen 
per day worth about 500 credits in most markets. psychics. These psychics can sense and affect any 
These raw materials can be used to feed a mobile object or location within ten meters of the relic 
factory, and a ship may have more than one mo- after one minute of concentration, provided they 
bile extractor fitted to it to multiply the return are within the same solar system. Thus, teleport-
if sufficient raw feedstock is available. Operating ers can always teleport next to the anchorpoint, 
an extractor requires at least five crew members. telepaths can always contact anyone within the 

Mobile factory: The ship is equipped with a full-scale affected zone, telekinetics can manipulate objects 
TL4 fabrication plant programmed to support its near the relic, and so forth. The relic can be re-
needs. The ship can stock raw materials and parts coded to eliminate existing imprints, but any psy-
at 5,000 credits per ton; these parts can then be chic who gets access to the relic for ten minutes of 
used to “pay” ship repair or maintenance costs meditation and focus can imprint on it afterwards. 
when conventional shipyards are unavailable. The There is no obvious way to tell how many psychics 
factory can also create and repair vehicles, TL4 have imprinted to the anchorpoint.
equipment, space habs, and planetary structures Sensor mask: The ship can disguise its long-range sen-
with these parts at a rate of 10,000 credits worth sor readings, spoofing scans with the ID tags and 
of construction a day. If a mobile extractor is apparent hull type of any other ship of its choice. 
available, the raw materials processed by the lat- To penetrate this masquerade, the scanning enti-
ter unit can be used to feed the factory. Operating ty must beat a Wis/Program skill check against 
a mobile factory requires at least 100 well-trained difficulty 10 plus the Program skill of the mask-
personnel. Each 10 fewer available doubles repair ing ship’s comms officer. Once the ship is close 
or maintenance times. enough to visually identify, the masking is useless.



100• Building a Starship

Ship bays: These sophisticated docking bays provide System drive: The ship’s standard drive-1 spike drive is 
all the necessary tools and support for launching removed and replaced with a different propulsion 
a starship from the mother craft. They are rare- system. The ship is still treated as having a drive-1 
ly seen outside of dedicated capital-class carriers, for maneuvering and system transit purposes, but 
but some cruisers make room to mount a fight- it cannot make interstellar drills. This modifica-
er-class attack shuttle. Each bay allows room for tion lowers the cost of the basic hull by 10% and 
one ship of the appropriate hull class. While the adds extra power and space based on the size of 
carried ship can support its own crew if neces- the hull: 1 power for fighters, 2 for frigates, 3 for 
sary, most carriers fold their space wing into the cruisers, and 4 for capital ship hulls. Twice this 
mothership’s crew roster. This fitting can be taken amount of free mass is gained by the process.
multiple times. Teleportation pads: This TL5 tech is completely unavail-

Ship’s locker: Much like an armory, this option allows able in most sectors and was uncommon even on 
a captain to lay in a general supply of equipment Mandate-era ships. The pads allow up to a dozen 
likely to be useful to explorers and spacemen. Any people or 1,200 kilograms of matter to be tele-
TL4 equipment on the gear list can be found in ported to and from the surface of a planet or the 
the ship’s locker in amounts commensurate with interior of a another ship, provided it is no more 
the ship’s size. A few guns and some basic armor than a few tens of thousands of kilometers distant. 
might be included as well, but for serious arma- Ship-to-ship teleportation is possible only when 
ment an armory is required. There is enough gear the receiving ship is cooperating by transmitting 
available to outfit the entire crew for normal use, accurate coordinate details; otherwise, a friendly, 
but giving it away or losing it in use may deplete unjammed signal from inside is necessary to lock 
the locker until it is restocked. onto the target point. Planetary teleportations are 

Shiptender mount: The ship is designed with symbiosis possible only in the absence of physical barriers 
mounts that allow other ships to “hitch” on the between the ship and the target point below. The 
craft’s spike drills. Each shiptender mount allows teleporters may be used once every five minutes. 
one craft of a hull size smaller than the tender to In those rare sectors where this tech is widely 
link up for intersystem drills. Mounts cannot be available, it costs 200k.
used for in-system travel. If the linking ship has Tractor beams: Gravitic projectors allow the ship to ma-
been designed to be carried by a tender then es- nipulate objects within its immediate area, push-
tablishing this link takes one hour. If not, it takes ing, pulling, and sliding objects no larger than a 
a full day to fit the ship into the mount. Ships can ship of one hull class smaller. Targets with ship-
dismount from the tender with an hour’s disen- scale propulsion can resist the beams, but lifeboats, 
tanglement. In an emergency, the carried ships can individual suit jets, or other smaller propulsors 
dismount instantly, but the mountings are consid- are inadequate. The beam can focus on only one 
ered disabled then until repairs are made. Carried object at a time but can move it into the ship’s 
ships cannot fight. cargo bays or hurl it out of the ship’s immediate 

Smuggler’s hold: Carefully-designed storage space in- vicinity within three rounds. The beams can only 
tended to conceal illicit cargo from customs in- effectively manipulate objects in very low gravity, 
spection. Each installation of this fitting adds 200 and not those on the surface of planets or other 
kilograms of cargo space in a fighter, 2 tons in a objects with significant natural gravity.
frigate, 20 tons in a cruiser, or 200 tons in a capi- Vehicle transport fittings: The ship has been fitted with 
tal ship. Cargo in a smuggler’s hold will never be specialized mounts, bunking, cargo bays, and 
found by a standard customs inspection. Careful other facilities to expedite the transport of of-
investigation by a suspicious official can find it on ten-unwieldy vehicles, including mechs and other 
a difficulty 10 check using their Wis/Notice skill, military craft. Any vehicles carried count as only 
and a week-long search one step short of disas- half their usual cargo tonnage. Assuming trained 
sembly will find it on a difficulty 7 check. operators, up to four vehicles can be offloaded or 

Survey sensor array: Most ships require only basic ramped onto the ship per round in cases where 
analysis of a star system, sufficient to identify speed is critical.
population centers, do rough scanning of an ob- Workshops: On-board workshops can be bought at 
ject’s composition, and chart major navigational smaller than maximum sizes than a hull would al-
hazards. Survey sensor arrays greatly enhance low, if additional TL4 tech facilities aren’t strictly 
the ship’s sensor abilities, allowing for finely-de- needed. A frigate-sized workshop is sufficient for 
tailed mapping of objects and planets, along with modding any personal gear as per the modification 
broad-spectrum communications analysis. They rules on page 100. A cruiser-sized workshop can 
also improve attempts to detect other craft when handle vehicle modding and starship maintenance, 
scanning a region for stealthy vessels. Any rolls and a capital-class workshop can build vehicles or 
with survey sensor arrays add +2 to skill checks. similar large work from scratch at full cost.



Building a Starship •101 

Starship Defenses

The defenses listed here are some of the more common Foxer Drones: These drones are invariably short-lived 
ones installed in modern TL4 starships. Most non-war- due to the enormous energy signatures they pro-
ships mount little or nothing in the way of special de- duce, but until the ship’s next turn they grant a +2 
fenses, preferring to save the hull space for cargo and AC bonus as their emissions confuse foes. Foxer 
immediately useful fittings. drones are cheaply constructed and essentially 

free; the only limit on their number is the amount 
Ablative Hull Compartments: By sacrificing empty hull of free space set aside for holding them.

space in a complex system of ablative blast baffles, Grav Eddy Displacer: This system links with a ship’s 
a capital-class ship can have a large amount of its navigational subsystem and randomizes the mo-
total mass shot away without actually impinging tion vectors in sympathy with metadimensional 
on its normal function. This grants it a +1 AC gravitic currents. This agility gives any hit on the 
bonus and 20 extra maximum hit points. ship a 1 in 6 chance of being negated entirely.

Augmented Plating: At the cost of a certain amount of Hardened Polyceramic Overlay: A complex glazing pro-
speed and maneuverability, a ship can have its ar- cess can harden the surface of a ship’s armor to 
mor plating reinforced against glancing hits, gain- more effectively shed incoming attacks, decreas-
ing a +2 bonus to its AC. This augmentation can ing the armor-piercing quality of any hit by 5.
decrease a ship’s Speed below 0, meaning it will Planetary Defense Array: The ship is equipped with 
be applied as a penalty to all Pilot tests. an array of gravitic braker guns and an upgrad-

Boarding Countermeasures: The ship has hardened ed nuke snuffer field. While useless in conven-
bulkheads, reinforced hatches, and specially-de- tional ship-to-ship combat, the array can deflect 
signed automated kill corridors for wiping out or dampen meteor impacts, dropped penetrator 
intruders. Provided that the ship’s bridge is still rods, or other non-powered bombardment tech-
under control, the operator can prevent entry to niques, and the snuffer field is powerful enough 
the ship by any force that lacks shipyard-grade to prevent nuclear fission reactions over a hemi-
tools, weapons capable of melting hull plating, sphere-sized area. A single ship with a PDA can 
or specialized military breaching implements. If protect against any natural meteor strikes and 
intruders do get inside, only well-equipped, spe- deny easy terror bombardment of a planet’s pop-
cially-trained marines have any real chance of ulation. The PDA cannot fully protect against 
breaching the defenses. Ordinary space pirates or orbital strikes by powered penetrators, but it can 
more casual invaders have only a 1 in 6 chance nudge them off course and make pinpoint strikes 
of threatening the bridge crew, though they may impractical. Most developed planets have much 
cause significant damage in their dying. more powerful and effective ground installations, 

Burst ECM Generator: A high-powered secondary ECM but a PDA-equipped ship is a useful emergency 
generator can be activated to negate any one oth- stopgap for poor or primitive worlds.
erwise-successful hit against the ship. This gen- Point Defense Lasers: Too small to damage ships, these 
erator can be activated after the damage has been point defense lasers can detonate or melt incom-
rolled, but enemy ships rapidly compensate for the ing munitions, improving the ship’s defenses 
new ECM source, and so the generator can only against torpedoes, fractal impact charges, and 
be used effectively once per engagement. other ammunition-based weapons.

Ship Defense Cost Power Mass Class Effect

Ablative Hull Compartments 100k* 5 2# Capital  +1 AC, +20 maximum hit points

Augmented Plating 25k* 0 1# Fighter  +2 AC, -1 Speed

Boarding Countermeasures 25k* 2 1# Frigate Makes enemy boarding more difficult

Burst ECM Generator 25k* 2 1# Frigate Negate one successful hit

Foxer Drones 10k* 2 1# Cruiser  +2 AC for one round when fired, Ammo 5

Grav Eddy Displacer 50k* 5 2# Frigate 1 in 6 chance of any given attack missing.

Hardened Polyceramic Overlay 25k* 0 1# Fighter AP quality of attacking weapons reduced by 5

Planetary Defense Array 50k* 4 2# Frigate Anti-impact and anti-nuke surface defenses

Point Defense Lasers 10k* 3 2# Frigate  +2 AC versus weapons that use ammo

* Credit costs are multiplied by 10 for frigate-class hulls, 25 for cruisers, and 100 for capital-class hulls

# These costs are multiplied by 2 for frigates, 3 for cruisers, and 4 for capital hulls.



102• Building a Starship

Starship Weaponry

Space is dangerous, and most ships mount the best 
weapons their purse and their ship’s infrastructure Weapon Descriptions
can support. While most worlds limit the purchase of Each weapon listed below has a cost, the damage die it 
warships by civilians, few place restraints on the type uses on a hit, and the amount of hardpoints, free power, 
of weapons a civilian ship can mount. and mass it takes up in a hull. The minimum hull class 

Ship weaponry tends to come in two classes. One required to mount it is also listed, as is the minimum 
class of weapon is damaging and has moderate pow- tech level to manufacture it.
er and mass demands, but has comparatively weak All ship weapon attack and damage rolls use the 
armor-piercing capabilities. Another class of weap- better of the gunner’s Intelligence or Dexterity modi-
on is expensive, taxing to a ship’s systems, and may fiers. Most use Shoot as the relevant skill, though Pilot 
have somewhat inferior damage, but it has enough ar- can be used for the guns of a fighter-class ship.
mor-piercing to affect a warship of a hull size one step 
larger than the mounting starship. Multifocal Laser: Twinned assay and penetration la-

The choice of which class of weapon to mount sers modulate the frequency of this beam for re-
usually depends on the type of opposition the designer markable armor penetration. These weapons are 
expects the ship to face. Most civilian ships favor the popular choices for fighters intended for frigate 
former kind, as few expect to engage true warships. or cruiser engagement.

Reaper Battery: Stepped tapping of the spike drive 
Weapon Qualities power plant allows for the emission of a torrent 
Ammo: The weapon or defense requires ammunition of charged particles. The particles have very little 

to fire. Each round’s cost is listed after the weap- armor penetration, but can fry a small ship’s pow-
on’s cost, and a number of rounds equal to the er grid in a strike or two.
weapon’s Ammo rating can be fit into one free Fractal Impact Charge: A spray of penetrator sabots that 
mass unit. For example, a torpedo launcher can fit use fractal surfacing to increase impact. Favored 
the magazine and loading gear for four torpedoes for bomber-class fighter hulls.
into one free mass unit, and each torpedo will cost Polyspectral MES Beam: A rare example of pretech 
2,500 credits. For each ship class larger than the weaponry, a fighter equipped with a PMB can 
minimum required to mount the weapon, double scratch even a battleship’s hull.
the stored ammo per unit. The weapon itself in- Sandthrower: Projecting a spray of tiny, dense partic-
cludes one free mass unit worth of ammunition ulate matter, sandthrowers are highly effective 
as part of the installation, so simply mounting a against lightly-armored fighters.
torpedo launcher alone on a frigate gives the ship Flak Emitter Battery: A baseline frigate anti-fighter sys-
four rounds of ammo. tem, this battery fires waves of lasers or charged 

AP: The weapon ignores this many points of a target’s particles to knock down small craft.
armor. The Hardened Polyceramic Overlay defense Torpedo Launcher: Capable of damaging even a battle-
upgrade may lessen the effectiveness of this quali- ship, torpedoes are cumbersome, expensive, and 
ty. The most a weapon’s AP rating can do is reduce often the core of a line frigate’s armament.
a target’s effective armor to zero. It cannot add Charged Particle Caster: A focalized upgrade to the 
additional damage to a hit. reaper battery, the CPC has a much better armor 

Cloud: The weapon fires an omni-directional wave penetration profile.
or spray of projectiles. It automatically targets Plasma Beam: With superior targeting and a smaller 
all fighter-class ships that have attacked the ship energy drain than a CPC, a plasma beam sacrifices 
within the past round, and the gunner may make some armor penetration.
one attack roll against each target. Cloud weapons Mag Spike Array: A storm of magnetically-accelerated 
have no effect on ships larger than fighter-class spike charges is almost guaranteed to eradicate any 
hulls or intruders who are actually on the hull. fighter-class craft it hits.

Clumsy: Either through a slow discharge time or un- Nuclear Missiles: Useless in ship-to-ship combat or 
wieldy engineering requirements, this weapon against any other TL4 planet with working nuke 
suffers -4 to hit small fighter-class hulls. snuffers, one of these missiles can still erase an 

Flak: These weapons launch vast numbers of small entire lostworlder city without such protection.
energy discharges or projectiles, and are particu- Spinal Beam Cannon: One of the first spinal-mount class 
larly dangerous to small ships that rely on speed weapons, the SBC briefly channels the full power 
over thick armor. Against fighter-class hulls, these of the ship into a charged beam. It lacks the power 
weapons roll hit rolls and damage rolls twice and and penetration of the more advanced gravcan-
take the better result. non, but also takes less power to mount.



Building a Starship •103 

Smart Cloud: A swarm of self-directed microdrones 
sweeps over the ship. Their integral beam weap- Ground Weapons vs. Ships
onry is too small to damage larger ships, but they On rare occasions, PCs will have to deal with small 
can wipe out an attacking fighter wave. arms fire against their spaceship, or evade ground 

Gravcannon: Using much the same principles as guns when trying to escape a port or land safely 
man-portable grav weaponry, the gravcannon on a hostile world. 
causes targets to fall apart in a welter of mutual- As a basic rule of thumb, hostile TL3 small 
ly-antagonistic gravitic fields. arms fire does no damage, TL4 small arms fire 

Spike Inversion Projector: The SIP uses the ship’s spike does 1d6 damage per ten minutes of persistent 
phasing as an offensive weapon, penetrating the gunfire, and Heavy weapons do half their rolled 
target with a brief incursion of MES energies that damage, minus the ship’s Armor. Multiple Heavy 
largely ignore attempts to evade. weapons blazing away at a grounded free mer-

Vortex Tunnel Inductor: A capital-class model of the SIP, chant can reduce it to unflyable scrap in short 
a VTI is capable of incapacitating a cruiser in two order, but a peppering of mag rifle fire is unlikely 
hits. Its bulk limits its utility against fighter-class to do serious damage to a ship that decamps with 
craft, however. sufficient speed.

Mass Cannon: By firing projectiles almost as large as It is impossible to miss a grounded ship. The 
fighter-scale craft, the mass cannon inflicts tre- Armor Class of a ship in flight will vary with the 
mendous damage on a target. Serious ammunition situation; AC 10 for hovering nearby, AC 15 for 
limitations hamper its wider-scale use. close-to-earth flight, and AC 20 if the ship is sim-

Lightning Charge Mantle: Modulation of the ship’s ply flying within weapon range.
power core emits a cloak of MES lightning. While Active ground-placed anti-ship defenses are 
larger spike drive craft can shunt the energies a different matter. These massive lasers and ener-
away harmlessly, fighter-class ships are almost gy projectors are absolutely lethal at atmospheric 
invariably destroyed if hit. ranges. Avoiding them is a Pilot skill check at a 

Singularity Gun: One of the few surviving pretech GM-chosen difficulty of 8 to 10 for each round the 
weapons in anything resembling wide currency, ship is exposed, suffering 2d10 damage with AP 
this capital-class weapons system fires something 20 on each miss. A desperate ship can get outside 
mathematically related to a miniaturized black the gun’s firing angle if it can survive three rounds 
hole at a target. of this peril.

Ship Weapon Cost Dmg Power Mass Hard. Class TL Qualities

Multifocal Laser 100k 1d4 5 1 1 Fighter 4 AP 20
Reaper Battery 100k 3d4 4 1 1 Fighter 4 Clumsy
Fractal Impact Charge 200k/500 2d6 5 1 1 Fighter 4 AP 15, Ammo 4
Polyspectral MES Beam 2m 2d4 5 1 1 Fighter 5 AP 25
Sandthrower 50k 2d4 3 1 1 Fighter 4 Flak
Flak Emitter Battery 500k 2d6 5 3 1 Frigate 4 AP 10, Flak
Torpedo Launcher 500k/2.5k 3d8 10 3 1 Frigate 4 AP 20, Ammo 4
Charged Particle Caster 800k 3d6 10 1 2 Frigate 4 AP 15, Clumsy
Plasma Beam 700k 3d6 5 2 2 Frigate 4 AP 10
Mag Spike Array 1m/5k 2d6+2 5 2 2 Frigate 4 Flak, AP 10, Ammo 5

Nuclear Missiles 50k/5k Special 5 1 2 Frigate 4 Ammo 5
Spinal Beam Cannon 1.5m 3d10 10 5 3 Cruiser 4 AP 15, Clumsy
Smart Cloud 2m 3d10 10 5 2 Cruiser 4 Cloud, Clumsy
Gravcannon 2m 4d6 15 4 3 Cruiser 4 AP 20
Spike Inversion Projector 2.5m 3d8 10 3 3 Cruiser 4 AP 15
Vortex Tunnel Inductor 5m 3d20 20 10 4 Capital 4 AP 20, Clumsy
Mass Cannon 5m/50k 2d20 10 5 4 Capital 4 AP 20, Ammo 4
Lightning Charge Mantle 4m 1d20 15 5 2 Capital 4 AP 5, Cloud
Singularity Gun 20m 5d20 25 10 5 Capital 5 AP 25



104• Example Starships

Example Starships

Below are the final statistics for some of the more Costs are listed for the ship itself, for its six-month 
common starship models in post-Silence human space. maintenance, and for the yearly employment of its 
Each entry includes the default NPC crew skill modifier standard crew complement. PCs naturally need not 
and the normal number of Command Points each one draw this pay, though they’ll still need to lay out 20 
gets each round under NPC crews. credits a day per head for food and other basic supplies.

Strike Fighter The standard drill-capable fighter craft of most TL4 
HP: 8 Power: 5/1 free polities, this model retains a spike drive instead of re-

AC: 16 Mass: 2/0 free placing it with a cheaper systems drive. While the lone 
pilot would have to be desperate and heavily drugged 

Armor: 5 Crew: 1/1 to make an entire spike drill solo, it remains an option 
Speed: 5 Hull Class: Fighter when no larger craft is available.

Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 4 This particular model is equipped with a reaper 

Weapons: Reaper Battery (+4/3d4, Clumsy) battery for dealing with small, lightly-armored civil-
ian ships. “Bomber”-type fighters usually replace this 

Defenses: None with a fractal impact charge to threaten larger warships, 
Spike Drive-1

Fittings: while fighters built to dogfight their peers favor fitting 
Atmospheric Configuration a multifocal laser.

Cost: 305K base price, 15,250 maintenance, 
43,800 yearly crew cost for 1 pilot

Shuttle This craft is a conventional civilian shuttle, albeit one 
HP: 15 Power: 3/2 free with a spike drive sufficient to get it to a neighboring 
AC: 11 Mass: 5/0 free system and enough passenger space to make it a min-

imally-acceptable transport for brave VIPs and light 
Armor: 0 Crew: 1/20 cargo. If used as an inter-system transport, however, at 
Speed: 3 Hull Class: Fighter least three crew will be needed to safely navigate a drill.

Crew Skill: +1 NPC CP: 4 While cheap and flexible, the shuttle is entirely 
Weapons: None unarmed and acutely vulnerable to piracy or hostile 

warships. In such cases the pilot’s only recourse is to 
Defenses: None surrender or hope the small craft’s nimble maneuver 

Spike Drive-1 drives can keep it away from the attacker long enough 
Fittings: Atmospheric Configuration to get to safety.

Extended Life Support, 6 tons cargo

Cost: 210K base price, 10,500 maintenance, 
43,800 yearly crew cost for 1 pilot

Free Merchant A mainstay of freebooting merchant-adventurers 
HP: 20 Power: 10/0 free throughout human space, the standard free merchant 

is an extremely versatile craft, capable of hauling sig-
AC: 14 Mass: 15/0 free nificant amounts of cargo to neighboring systems while 

Armor: 2 Crew: 1/6 requiring very few hands to operate it. Only one crew 
Speed: 3 Hull Class: Frigate member is needed for in-system flight, though spike 

Crew Skill: +1 NPC CP: 4 drills require three for normal margins of safety.
The standard free merchant is not a warship, but 

Multifocal Laser (+3/1d4, AP 20)
Weapons: its sandthrower is enough to discourage pirate shuttles 

Sandthrower (+3/2d4, Flak) and the other small or fragile craft that wreckers or 
Defenses: None primitive worlds tend to favor. The multifocal laser 

Spike Drive-1, 160 tons of cargo space is ideal for a highly-skilled gunner who can snipe out 
Fittings: Atmospheric Configuration important systems on an attacking vessel, but the ship 

Fuel Scoops, Fuel Bunker lacks the armor and durability to stand up to a true war-
ship. Of course, with a sufficiently expert crew, even a 

Cost: 775K base price, 38,750 maintenance, 
131,400 yearly crew cost for 3 crew corvette might be threatened by the well-aimed guns 

of a small craft like this.



Example Starships •105 

Patrol Boat Patrol boats are often the largest ships fielded by poor 
HP: 25 Power: 15/1 free or backward frontier worlds that lack the shipyard fa-
AC: 14 Mass: 10/0 free cilities or available resources to build bigger military 

craft. Even so, the ability to field two patrol boats for 
Armor: 5 Crew: 5/20 the yearly maintenance cost of one corvette often ap-
Speed: 4 Hull Class: Frigate peals even to richer worlds that need more coverage 

Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5 than their available craft can provide.
Weapons: Plasma Beam (+4/3d6, AP 10) Patrol boats are the smallest independent warships 

fielded by most navies, as fighters are not normally 
Defenses: None considered capable of extended independent opera-

Spike Drive-2 tion. They have considerable spike drive reach and are 
Atmospheric Configuration

Fittings: faster in-system than most of their potential targets. 
Extended Stores, Boarding Tubes While their single mounted gun is vulnerable to being 
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Survey Sensors disabled by expert enemy gunners, the relatively thick 
3.523M base price, 176K maintenance, armor of the ship and skilled damage control crew can 

Cost:
657K yearly crew cost for 15 crew mitigate that danger. A few patrol boats replace their 

survey sensor array with a sandthrower to up-gun the 
ship, but most prefer the additional edge in scanning 
potential smugglers.

Corvette The usual ship of the line of most modestly-funded 

HP: 40 Power: 15/0 free frontier navies, a corvette is a true warship, albeit of 
a minimal size. While it is unable to land on worlds 

AC: 13 Mass: 15/0 free with standard gravity, its cargo lighter allows crew and 
Armor: 10 Crew: 10/40 cargo transit from the surface of a world, and its ex-
Speed: 2 Hull Class: Frigate tended stores allow for more than four months of field 

Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5 operation under normal crew parameters.
Most pirates flying reworked free merchants 

2 Plasma Beams (+4/3d6, AP 10)
Weapons: or stolen patrol boats will turn tail as soon as a cor-

Sandthrower (+4/2d4, Flak) vette shows up in the region. Good armor, multiple 
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay ship-killing guns, and trained boarding marines make 

Spike Drive-2, Cargo Lighter a corvette a death sentence to most stellar ruffians, and 
Fittings: Extended Stores, Boarding Tubes even when a pirate wolf pack can bring one down, it 

Armory, Ship’s Locker, Fuel Bunker usually comes at the cost of crippling damage.

5.973M base price, 298K maintenance The model depicted here is standard for anti-pi-
Cost:

1.314M yearly crew cost for 30 crew racy and basic system defense missions. Against cruis-
er-class warships, however, this corvette’s weapons 
have insufficient armor penetration to seriously threat-
en such a major warship.

Heavy Frigate Sometimes confusingly called a “light cruiser”, a heavy 
HP: 50 Power: 25/0 free frigate pushes the engineering parameters of a frigate 

hull to the maximum available to most TL4 worlds. 
AC: 15 Mass: 20/0 free Equipped with a torpedo launcher capable of threat-

Armor: 10 Crew: 30/120 ening even cruiser-class enemies, the heavy frigate 
Speed: 1 Hull Class: Frigate can intimidate any ship of its weight class. Its heavy 

Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5 crew complement and military drop pod fitting allow 
it to quickly dispatch well-armed marines to hot spots 

2 Plasma Beams (+4/3d6, AP 10)
Weapons: throughout a solar system.

Torpedo (+4/3d8, AP 20, Ammo 4) However, despite the large weapon loadout, the 
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay heavy frigate remains a frigate. Its armor is significant-

Spike Drive-2, Drop Pod, 16 Torpedoes ly inferior to that of a true cruiser-class warship, and 
Fittings: Fuel Scoops, Fuel Bunker, Armory most frigates built for same-class engagements can be 

Ship’s Locker, Boarding Tubes a meaningful threat to it. It comes into its own as a 
9.783M base price, 489K maintenance bludgeon against the other small warships likely to be 

Cost:
3.942M yearly crew cost for 90 crew fielded by a peer star-faring polity.



106• Example Starships

Bulk Freighter Found only in rich, peaceful regions of space, the bulk 
HP: 40 Power: 10/2 free freighter is capable of hauling thousands of tons of 
AC: 11 Mass: 25/0 free goods between star systems. While it’s equipped with 

enough of a sting to discourage small-ship piracy, it’s 
Armor: 0 Crew: 10/40 woefully inadequate to handle a warship, or even an 
Speed: 0 Hull Class: Cruiser up-gunned free merchant.

Crew Skill: +1 NPC CP: 4 Some adventurers do find use for a bulk freighter 
Weapons: Plasma Beam (+3/3d6, AP 10) hull, however, trading off some of its massive cargo 

space for more fittings and using customized modi-
Defenses: None fications to allow the ship to support heavier power 

Spike Drive-2, Cargo Lighter demands. While the end result is no match for a true 
Fittings: Fuel Bunker, Ship’s Locker cruiser, the sheer mass of the freighter can make it a 

3,400 tons of cargo space dangerous opponent in the right hands.
6.088M base price, 304K maintenance

Cost:
657K yearly crew cost for 15 crew

Fleet Cruiser The archetypal warship of post-Silence humanity, the 
HP: 60 Power: 50/4 free fleet cruiser is a ship-eating monster compared to its 
AC: 14 Mass: 30/0 free smaller brethren in the navy. Only prosperous polities 

Armor: 15 Crew: 50/200 can build such powerful ships, and even they some-
times find it more practical to have a flexible fleet of 

Speed: 1 Hull Class: Cruiser small craft rather than a few heavily-armed cruisers.
Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5 The chief advantage of a fleet cruiser is in its heav-

Gravcannon (+5/4d6, AP 20) ily-armored hull. Only special hunter-killer ships fitted 
Weapons: Smart Cloud (+5/3d10, Cloud, Clumsy) with armor-piercing weaponry have any real chance of 

2 Multifocal Laser (+5/1d4, AP 20) penetrating the cruiser’s thick skin. Those weapons are 
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay almost always more bulky and power-hungry than their 

peer weapons, so enemy polities must usually choose 
Spike Drive-3, Drop Pod between building small ships that are very effective at 
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Boarding Tubes

Fittings: defeating other small ships, or building hunter-killers 
Fuel Scoops, Advanced Nav Computer that can threaten cruisers but are at a disadvantage 
60 tons of cargo space against their less specialized brethren.
17.17M base price, 858K maintenance

Cost:
6.58M yearly crew cost for 150 crew

Battleship
Built off the biggest hull class that TL4 polities can 

HP: 120 Power: 75/8 free create, only the richest modern worlds can afford to 
AC: 17 Mass: 50/0 free fabricate these massive engines of war. Even those 

Armor: 20 Crew: 200/1,000 worlds with adequate resources to do so often balk at 
Speed: 0 Hull Class: Capital expending such a tremendous amount of money on a 

single ship.
Crew Skill: +3 NPC CP: 6 Those that do build battleships do so for a reason. 

Vortex Tunnel (+6/3d20, AP 20, Clumsy) The tremendous weight of fire these ships put out can 
Weapons: Light. Charge Mant. (+6/1d20, AP 5 Cloud) pop a cruiser in a single firing pass, and its reinforced 

2 Multifocal Lasers (+6/1d4, AP 20) hull plating shrugs off all but the heaviest armor-pierc-
Gravcannon (+6/4d6, AP 20) ing blows. Where cruisers often require hunter-killer 
Hardened Polyceramic Overlay

Defenses: frigates to take them out, battleships commonly require 
Ablative Hull Compartments hunter-killer cruisers to disable them.
Spike Drive-3, Drop Pod The main weakness of a battleship is the fact that it 
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Boarding Tubes is only a single ship… a single, extremely expensive ship. 

Fittings: Fuel Scoops, Advanced Nav Computer It can only attack or defend a single location at a time, 
Ship bay/Fighter w/Shuttle and an enemy that has the time and resources to build 
Fuel Bunkers, 200 tons of cargo specialized anti-capital ships with AP weaponry and 
79.06M base price, 4M maintenance expendable crews can bring the battleship down for far 

Cost:
35M yearly crew cost for 800 crew less money than it cost to build it.



Example Starships •107 

Building a Ship
A fortunate adventurer has won the favor of a pow- Next, she thinks about better engines. She brief-
erful shipping magnate, and has earned one million ly considers a drive-3 upgrade, but it would take 4 
credits worth of astronautic work. The player thinks points of Power and Mass, leaving her almost no 
it’s an excellent chance to have a ship built to fit the Power left for other fittings. She settles for a drive-2 
adventuring party’s needs. upgrade for 100k credits, 2 Power, and 2 Mass.

She starts by looking over the ship hulls and She takes a moment to think about adding some 
quickly sees that a free merchant hull is the best she hardened polyceramic overlay to the merchant as a 
can afford. A shuttle hull might work, but such a defense, but the ship’s Armor is so low that it doesn’t 
ship is too fragile for her liking. The hull itself costs seem worth the effort to harden it.
500,000 credits and comes with a drive-1 spike drive. The PCs will need to land, so she adds an atmo-

It also has free Power and Mass scores of 10 and spheric configuration at 50k and 2 Mass. She wants 
15 respectively. The player can fill that space with fuel scoops so she doesn’t have to trust to local refuel-
fittings and defenses as she wishes. ing stations, so that’s 50k, 2 Power, and 2 Mass. Pru-

First, she looks at weaponry. She wants enough dence recommends a fuel bunker in case she needs 
firepower to discourage small ships, but she can’t to drill out before refueling, adding 25k and 1 Mass.
mount weapons that require a cruiser or capital hull, She’s so far spent 929,000 credits, 9 Power, and 
and a plasma beam is far too expensive. She could 8 Mass. To spare bookkeeping, she puts in a ship’s 
settle for a multifocal laser, which is cheap, but she locker for 25k, but an armory is too expensive; the 
decides to up-gun to a fractal impact charge, trusting PCs will just have to track their own weapons and 
in the party’s Warrior to aim it well. It costs 200k ammo. The remaining Mass is turned into 140 tons 
credits, 5 power, 1 mass, and 1 free hardpoint. It can of cargo space. Thus, the final ship costs 954,000 
store up to 8 charges in the launcher since a frig- credits and uses 9 Power, and 15 Mass. At a rate of 
ate-class hull is one larger than the minimum needed 25,000 credits of shipyard work a day, it’ll take the 
to mount it. The charges themselves will cost her yards about 39 days to build, giving the party time to 
another 4,000 credits. think about how they’ll pay for maintenance…

Carrier The queen of every navy that has one, a carrier is the 
HP: 95 Power: 50/9 free pinnacle of TL4 shipbuilding technology and a mas-
AC: 14 Mass: 100/0 free sive credit sink for any polity rich or desperate enough 

to build one. Every fully-equipped carrier holds more 
Armor: 10 Crew: 200/1,500 firepower than most modern navies can assemble, and 
Speed: 0 Hull Class: Capital a single carrier is more than enough to crush most TL4 

Crew Skill: +3 NPC CP: 6 naval task forces.
Weapons: Gravcannon (+6/4d6, AP 20) The carrier itself is only the vector for its tremen-

dous payload of ships, both small fighters and cor-
Hardened Polyceramic Overlay

Defenses: vette-type daughter craft. The ability to quickly alter 
Ablative Hull Compartments the flight wings of a carrier allows a rich planet to tailor 
Drive-3, Drop Pod, 1000 tons cargo its loadout to the specific needs of a campaign, wheth-
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Workshop er it’s destroying the interstellar commerce and aster-
Fuel Scoops, Advanced Nav Computer

Fittings: oid mines of an enemy polity or going head-to-head 
Lifeboats, Fuel Bunkers against their cruiser line of battle. Many polities further 
20 Ship Bay/Fighter w/Fighters optimize their carrier-loaded ships by removing their 
5 Ship Bay/Frigate w/Corvettes spike drives and replacing them with system drives, re-
126.88M base, 6.35M maintenance lying on the carrier to get them into position. Of course, 

Cost:
43.8M yearly crew cost for 1,000 crew if the mothership is destroyed in hostile territory, these 

orphans are doomed.
While a carrier has a belly full of death, the ship 

itself is lightly gunned and has significantly weaker 
armor than its battleship brethren. Any polity rich 
enough to build a carrier knows well enough to equip 
it with an escort of other ships to screen it from hos-
tile attentions. Lightly-armed as it is, a wing of fight-
er-bombers can leave it a burning hulk if it’s caught out 
without protection.



108• Modifying and Tuning Starships

Modifying and Tuning Starships

Most ships are maintained in the condition they came 
from the shipyard, with the crew and the engineers Installing Mods
working to keep things aligned with the shipwright’s Every starship mod requires a certain amount of refit-
specifications. Such rigid conformity with standard ting work and after-market parts, along with a poten-
techniques ensures easy repair, cheap maintenance, and tial need for one or more pretech components. These 
the ready ability to switch crews without requiring la- pretech components are not normally for sale, and are 
borious retraining or familiarization. Not all engineers usually found only through salvage during adventur-
value these qualities so highly, however, and some pre- ing or as rewards for favors performed for important 
fer to install their own improvements. personages. While they vary in structure and appear-

A ship’s engineer can alter the wiring, internal ance, for convenience’s sake it’s assumed that a given 
structure, or other specifications of a starship, either component can serve in installing any mod.
to improve overall performance or make tradeoffs that Building the mod can be done at a rate of one day’s 
are useful to their needs. Making these modifications work for the crew per 5,000 credits in mod cost, or 
isn’t cheap, and they often require the strategic deploy- one day per 25,000 credits if a shipyard’s services are 
ment of rare pretech ship components. available. Mods can also be torn out, a process taking 

Engineers with sufficiently vast resources, ship- less than a day that reclaims any pretech components 
yard access, and available pretech components can used in their construction but wastes any credit invest-
completely re-engineer a ship to integrate their im- ment in parts. 
provements in the basic hull structure. These improve- Mod installation does not require a full shipyard, 
ments no longer require their special attention to keep but it does assume the full crew of the ship is assisting 
them operational, allowing the engineer to focus on the engineer in stripping components, welding in new 
other modifications or allow less talented crewmen to fittings, and hauling heavy parts. A lone engineer can’t 
keep the ship in fighting trim. make mods to anything larger than a frigate-class hull, 

and that might take a week’s painstaking labor for every 
Mods and Maintenance 5,000 credits of cost.
Every engineer has a Maintenance score, the same used 
for installing equipment mods as described on page 100. Redesigning Ships
The score is equal to their Intelligence modifier plus An engineer with vast amounts of money, components, 
their Constitution modifier plus three times their Fix and shipyard support can completely rebuild a ship hull 
score. Any mod maintenance is counted against this to include a mod as part of its basic structure, or re-
Maintenance score, whether for equipment or starships. design an existing hull schematic to include the mod. 

An engineer can maintain a number of mods at This is much more expensive than a quick after-market 
once equal to their Maintenance score. If a ship mod addition, but the mod becomes part of the basic ship 
is neglected for one week of active use, it breaks down. itself and requires no further Maintenance.
Any fittings or functions dependent on the mod also To rebuild a ship with a mod, the engineer must 
become inoperable until a sufficiently skilled engineer spend five times the usual cost in credits and twice as 
spends at least 8 hours repairing the mod, a process many pretech components as usually required by the 
which requires time but no significant additional parts. mod. A shipyard is mandatory for such extensive re-
Ships parked at a station or landing strip don’t count design, and can do the work at a rate of 25,000 credits 
as “active” for this purpose, so the ship’s engineer can worth each day.
go off for a week’s adventure or shore leave without To build an entirely new hull that includes the mod 
returning to a broken-down starship. as part of its design, only the normal price of the mod 

More than one engineer can work to maintain a must be paid in credits and components. By integrating 
ship’s modifications, provided the maintenance officer the modification into the ship’s basic blueprints, the 
has a Fix skill score as high as that needed to install the engineer makes it much easier to install and maintain 
mod in the first place. This also assumes that the chief it. Of course, the entire hull must then be built from 
engineer and any assistants work together closely to scratch at a shipyard, also at the usual rate of 25,000 
properly teach the structure and quirks of the modifica- credits of work done per day.
tion. The difficulty of maintaining this close teamwork There’s a limit to the amount of flexibility an engi-
and sourcing exotic parts to maintain a non-standard neer has in such designs, however. A ship can only be 
modification is one reason why very few NPC ships rebuilt or redesigned with a number of mods equal to 
have mods. While they’re possible for elite craft and twice the engineer’s Fix skill score. Further mods can 
idiosyncratic prototypes, most military ships or cor- be bolted on afterwards, but these will require Main-
porate traders have too much of a logistical burden to tenance to keep in operating order, just as with any 
support these odd alterations. other mod.



Modifying and Tuning Starships •109 

Example Starship Mods Eternal Reactor (Fix-2): The ship’s fuel tanks are re-
The following modifications aren’t the only alterations placed with effectively everlasting pretech energy 
that a canny engineer can install on a starship, but cores. It no longer needs to refuel for drills or op-
they’re among the most common. Each one is listed eration. Cost: 5% of hull, 2 components/hull class
with the minimum Fix skill required to install or main- Extended Mass Support (Fix-1): The engineer trims back 
tain the mod. the power core to allow for more ship mass. Lose 

The credit price for most is expressed in a per- up to ten points of free Power; gain half as many 
cent of the base hull cost; thus, to install a power trunk points of free Mass, rounded down. This mod can 
streamlining mod with a 10% cost in a free merchant be installed multiple times. Cost: 10% of hull, one 
hull would cost 50,000 credits, or 10% the cost of the component
base hull. In a battleship hull, that same mod would Low Emissions (Fix-1): Any sensor checks to detect the 
cost 6,000,000 credits. ship have their difficulty increased by +2. Cost: 

The pretech component cost is given in compo- 10% of hull, 1 component/hull class
nents per hull class. Thus, if a mod requires one com- Nemesis Tracker (Fix-3): The ship’s targeting comput-
ponent per hull class, it would take one component for ers are augmented with pretech prediction soft-
a fighter-class hull, two for a frigate, three for a cruiser, ware. Once per ship combat, a gunner on the ship 
and four for a capital-class hull. These pretech compo- can take an Instant action to cause a weapon shot 
nents are usually rare and restricted enough that they to hit, regardless of the hit roll. Cost: 5% of hull, 2 
cannot be purchased on the open market. PCs need components/hull class
to find them during their adventures, acquire them Oversized Mountings (Fix-2): Choose a specific weapon 
through favors to powerful persons, or intentionally or fitting that normally requires a hull size one 
seek them out in salvage adventures. step larger than the ship the mod is installed on. 

Most mods can be installed only once, though a The ship can mount that fitting. Cost: 15% of hull, 
few of them labeled otherwise can be duplicated as far 1 component/hull size
as the ship’s infrastructure can support them. Power Trunk Streamlining (Fix-1): Sacrifice free hull 

space for superior power core efficiency. Lose up 
Cargo Efficiency Bays (Fix-1): The ship’s internal struc- to five points of free Mass; gain twice as many 

ture is adjusted to optimize available cargo space. points of free Power. This mod can be installed 
The ship’s total free Mass is decreased by 10%, multiple times. Cost: 10% of hull, one component
rounded up, but, each point of Mass dedicated to Q-Ship Cladding (Fix-1): Some or all of ship’s weapons 
cargo space counts as two points. Cost: 10% of hull, are concealed from external observation and stan-
1 component/hull class dard scans when they are not deployed for combat. 

Compact Magazines (Fix-1): The ship can carry twice The ship itself can be made to look like a merchant 
as much ammunition as its available weapons and or freighter of its size class. Cost: 5% of hull, no 
magazine space would normally allow. Cost: 5% components
of hull, no components Regenerative Armor (Fix-3): The ship’s Armor score 

Drill Velocity Upgrade (Fix-2): The ship’s spike drive increases by 5 points. Cost: 15% of hull, 2 compo-
is counted as one level better when determining nents/hull class
spike drill transit speed and maximum drill range, Reinforced Armor (Fix-1): The ship’s Armor score in-
up to a maximum of drive-6. Cost: 10% of hull, 1 creases by the Fix skill of the installing engineer. 
component/hull class The ship loses one point of Power and one point 

Emergency Drill Activation (Fix-3): The ship can engage of Mass. Cost: 5% of hull
its spike drives even when in dangerous proximity Specialized Mountings (Fix-1): Choose a specific weapon 
to a planetary body. When engaged, it can drill out or fitting when this mod is installed. The chosen 
in a single round. Doing so increases the difficulty fitting requires only half the normal Power and 
of any spike drive skill check by +2 if in-system or Mass per fitting installation, rounded down to a 
+4 if actually landed. Drilling out from the surface minimum of 1. Cost: 10% of hull, no components
will destroy everything within 200 meters of the Volley Capacitors (Fix-2): The ship’s weaponry has been 
ship. The mod can be used only once every four altered for rapid firing. Once per combat, the 
weeks. Cost: 20% hull, 2 components/hull class ship’s gunner gets 4 Command Points that must 

Emergency Thruster Boost (Fix-1): Retune the engines be spent on gunnery actions. Cost: 10% of hull, 
for emergency power. Once per space combat, no components
gain a +2 bonus to Speed for three rounds. Cost: Weapon Overcharge (Fix-2): One weapon of the en-
10% of hull, no components gineer’s choice has been overcharged. It requires 

Engine Optimization (Fix-2): The engines have been 50% more Power than a usual installation, but 
optimized for realspace maneuverability. The rolls its damage twice and takes the better result 
ship’s Speed increases by 1. Cost: 10% of hull, 1 each time. This mod may be installed more than 
component/hull class once. Cost: 5% of hull, no components



110• Space Travel

Space Travel

Interstellar travel takes place through metadimensional 
space, a higher-order continuum “understood” by only Making Spike Drills
a handful of brilliant researchers and astronautic en- Interstellar spike drills are dangerous. Some sectors 
gineers. Fortunately, it is not necessary to have an in- have the technology and friendly-enough metadimen-
tuitive understanding of the place in order to operate sional weather to make standard drill paths relatively 
a spike drive starship. While modern postech spike safe for travel. Ships in these favored sectors can move 
drives are neither as powerful nor as efficient as the between connected worlds with no significant chance 
exquisite creations of the Terran Mandate, most TL4 of disaster. Other sectors are not so fortunate, nor are 
worlds can still put together the necessary components those ships that must forge through uncharted meta-
to get a ship from one stellar system to another. dimensional space to reach their destination. Careless 

Within the gravity well created by a stellar body, a navigation or sheer bad luck can result in these ships 
spike drive provides sub-light propulsion sufficient to being snuffed out by an unexpected surge of metadi-
get the ship to most system locations within a few days mensional energy or lost in the storms of hyperdimen-
at most. Only at the edge of a solar system, where the sional space.
gravitic influence of the star dwindles away to almost To make a successful spike drill, the target system 
nothing, can the spike drive be fully engaged to cata- must be within range. A spike drive has a hex range 
pult the ship into metadimensional space. This gravitic equal to its rating; a drive-3 can reach a star three hexes 
transition zone is critical for providing the necessary away on the sector map. Note that these sector maps 
step-up and step-down for a spike drive. Without such are abstractions rather than strict 2D maps. A star three 
a transition, a ship can neither climb into metadimen- hexes away might be a vast distance away, but connect-
sional space nor come down from those elevated di- ed by a friendly stretch of metadimensional space. Con-
mensional frequencies. Only a star is sufficient to pro- versely, an “empty” adjacent hex might have a star in 
vide enough of a gravitic gradient; random interstellar it, but it’s surrounded by killing waves of impenetrable 
rocks and debris don’t exert enough of an influence to dimensional disruption. Because of this, convention-
form a usable transition zone. al astronomical mapping isn’t overly useful to transit. 

Ships are generally unable to “overshoot” a transi- The astronomers might know that there’s a star only a 
tion zone. If a ship is coming into a system from a spike few light years away, but if the navigators can’t find a 
drive course to the stellar northwest of the star, it will metadimensional path to it, it might as well be on the 
appear at the northwest edge of the solar system. Its far side of the galaxy.
pilot can’t choose to “overshoot” that region, traveling A spike drill requires one load of fuel. Most ships 
across the solar system to come down on the south- can hold a single load of fuel at any one time. All can 
eastern edge of the star’s transition zone. This property be refueled from the appropriate refineries or starport 
allows a solar system’s owner to fortify probable transit tending services, while others can use fuel scoop fit-
paths into the system, placing defenses and picket ships tings to refuel from a star or gas giant. Other ships 
in the path of likely arrivals. have fuel bunkers that can hold more than one load of 

This can be a difficult and expensive process if the fuel, for quick double-drills when speed is vital. Normal 
star is in a crowded stellar neighborhood. The transit intra-system maneuvering uses no significant amount 
paths from each potential destination are different; if of fuel, and refueling costs a flat 500 credits per load.
a star has two other systems to its east, it has to fortify A spike drill requires time. A safe drill procedure 
two different arrival zones if it wants to be confident requires half an hour to enter metadimensional space, 
of detecting incoming ships from both stars. If an ex- though this process can be rushed at greater risk. The 
ceptionally powerful spike drive allows an intruder to transit time is six days per hex traveled, divided by the 
drill in from a more-distant star, the local polity might spike drill rating. Thus, a drive-3 crossing two hexes 
have no local sensors at all in the region, having never would take four days, while a drive-1 moving to an 
anticipated that a ship might come directly from such adjacent hex would take six days. Daring navigators 
a distant location. can “trim the course”, accepting greater risks in transit 

These relatively-fixed arrival zones only apply in order to increase their effective drive rating by 1 for 
to ships arriving at a star. A ship can leave from any purposes of determining the speed of travel, though 
location on the rim, traveling toward any destination this bonus doesn’t increase the drive’s maximum range.
within reach of its spike drive. Thus, a ship that’s able A spike drill needs a course record, or “rutter” to 
to skulk past a system’s frontier sensors can usually find guide the pilot. Ideally, this is an up-to-date and recent 
an empty region of space in the transition zone to skip record of the metadimensional currents and energetic 
out undetected. It also has no obligation to be on the weather between the origin and destination of their 

“correct side” of the star to go leaping off toward a par- course, one reported by a recent traveler. The older and 
ticular stellar destination. staler the readings of the rutter, the more dangerous 



Space Travel •111 

the drill. Most rutters for commonly-traveled routes Intra-System Travel
are freely available, and significant trade corridors Traveling inside a solar system is much safer and more 
usually have ones only a few days old available to any rapid than interstellar travel. Barring unusual perils or 
pilot making the drill. Rutters charting heretofore-un- mechanical failure, such journeys can be made without 
known paths between stars are often kept jealously se- Pilot skill checks or risk of dramatic mishaps.
cret by their owners, and may require an adventure or For convenience, space within a solar system is 
a favor to obtain. broken up in regions. Each region is simply a place of 

Attempting to drill to a star without any rutter interest within the system; planets are regions, fortified 
at all is insanely dangerous, the work of near-suicidal arrival zones are regions, particular pirate lairs in the 
crew of adventurers willing to risk everything in order asteroid belts are regions, and so forth. Any particular 
to obtain a secret route to some hopefully-unplundered place of interest and its satellite areas can be treated as 
world. Only a masterful interstellar navigator has any a single region.
real hope of surviving such a blind drill. The base travel time for moving inside a region is 

Finally, a spike drill needs a pilot. Only a human six hours. Thus, in six hours a ship could travel from a 
or other sentient-grade intellect is capable of dealing planetary starport to a site on the planet’s moon, or to 
with the dangerously unpredictable perils of metadi- a distant science station orbiting around the planet, or 
mensional space, as expert systems and other “dumb” to a distress beacon in space near that world. Any place 
robots simply can’t handle the random dangers. Most within that region can be reached within six hours, or 
ships require at least three crew members to cover all faster at the GM’s discretion.
the bridge watches necessary, though only one of these The base travel time for moving between regions 
crew needs to be an actual pilot. In desperate circum- is forty-eight hours. A ship in orbit around one planet 
stances, a lone pilot can use drugs to stay awake for as could thus travel to an entirely different planet, or to 
much as a week in order to single-handedly steer a ship the transition zone at the rim of the system, or to a 
to its destination. ship detected deep within system space, or to an aster-

If all these ingredients are in place and the ship oid pirate base, or to any other point of interest in the 
is at the edge of the solar system, a ship’s navigator solar system.
can make an Int/Pilot skill check to make a successful Base travel time is divided by the ship’s spike drive 
spike drill, the process taking 30 minutes. If rushed, rating. Thus, a ship with drive-3 could reach another 
it takes only one ship combat round to execute. The region in the system in only 16 hours. Bold navigators 
base difficulty is 7, modified by the available rutter, the can “trim the course” to increase their effective spike 
distance drilled, rushed procedures, and whether or not drive rating by 1 by making a successful Pilot check at 
the navigator is trimming the course to speed up the difficulty 9. On a failure, the travel actually takes twice 
transit. If the final difficulty is 6 or less, the drill is too as long as usual.
safe and simple to have any risk of failure.

Spike Drills 3d6 Spike Drill Mishap

Base difficulty for a spike drill 7 3 Catastrophic dimensional energy incursion. 
Ship emerges around a star within 1d6 
hexes of the target destination with drive 

The course is totally uncharted +6
and all systems destroyed.

The rutter’s more than 5 years old +2
4-5 Shear surge overwhelms internal systems. 

The rutter’s from 1 to 5 years old +1 Ship emerges around star nearest to drill 
The rutter’s less than a year old +0 origin. 50% chance for each system to be 
The rutter’s less than a month old -2 disabled until repaired. If the spike drive is 

disabled, treat as if a 3 were rolled.
6-8 Power spike. One system disabled until 

The drill’s distance, per 2 full hexes +1
repaired, ship stuck in transit for full base 

Trimming the course +2 time before being able to make another 
The drill activation was rushed +2 Pilot check. If the spike drive fails, treat as if 

 a 3 were rolled.
If the roll fails, something has gone wrong on 9-12 Ship off course. Spend base time in transit, 

the drill, and a roll on the failed navigation results are then make another Pilot check.
necessary. These mishaps don’t normally result in the 13-16 Ship off course, but detected early. Make 
summary death of the crew, but they often force the another Pilot check.
navigator to make emergency course changes or drill 16-17 Drill successful, but takes twice base time.
exits that might leave the ship in a dangerously un-
friendly region of space. 18 Drill successful and on time, by blind luck.



112• Sensors and Detection

Sensors and Detection

Adventurers often find it necessary to be very discreet To break a lock, a tracked ship needs to leave the 
about their comings and goings within a solar system, region. As soon as it does, the observer and the ship 
as do pirates, hostile warships, smugglers, and other repeat their opposed skill check. If the observer wins, 
nefarious sorts. Space is wide and dark, and if a ship is it continues to track the ship, while a tie or loss means 
careful to avoid inhabited regions it can often escape the ship slips the lock. Any observers in the destination 
notice by a system’s inhabitants. region can attempt to pick up the ship immediately and 

then once every 24 hours, but the original observer is 
Hiding and Seeking out of luck. Provided a ship is willing to escape to the 
As a general matter it is very difficult to spot a ship in region of deep space above or below the solar ecliptic, 
deep space when it doesn’t wish to be spotted. Once a it’s extremely unlikely that there’ll be anything there to 
ship’s energy signature is identified, however, it be- spot them. Of course, such escape also means staying 
comes much easier to follow the ship’s movement; such clear of potential refuges. A ship that flees to the “edge 
a positional fix is called a detection lock, and once a ship of the system” region can drill out to safety from there, 
has been locked by an observer it can be tracked at any and unless they pick a chunk of the rim monitored 
distance in the system. by the locals, they can do so with impunity. Very few 

Fixing a lock on a target requires the observer to worlds can monitor the entire system perimeter.
be in the same region of space and to win an opposed When rolling for observation, only roll once for 
Int/Program skill check against the ship’s comms of- any given group, outpost, or planet, using the best 
ficer. If the observer wins the opposed roll, they get a modifiers available. Thus, if a battle squadron includ-
detection lock on the ship. If they lose or tie, they re- ing a cruiser and three frigates rolls to observe, the 
main oblivious to the ship’s presence and can try again GM would use the skill bonus and +2 modifier for the 
in 24 hours. The active sensors used to form a detection cruiser’s crew. If a separate pirate ship was in the same 
lock can be detected by the target; they know they’ve region, the GM would roll for them as well, because 
been made. If the observing ship uses passive sensors, they’re a separate force in the region.
the lock is undetectable, but it’s more difficult to obtain.

The observer takes bonuses and penalties to their Pursuit and Escape
opposed skill check based on the circumstances as listed Adventurers have a habit of drawing unfriendly atten-
below. This can alter their die roll substantially, and tion from hostile ships. While escape from a combat 
make concealment almost impossible for ships not engagement is a matter of maneuver jets and good pi-
specially equipped for stealth. The modifiers below are loting, long-range chases rely more on a ship’s spike 
common ones, but particular regions of space may have drives to provide raw motive power.
their own hazards or complications, with some making A pursuer must be in the same region of space to 
detection so difficult that they become favorite lairs for pursue and must have a detection lock. Of course, if the 
pirates and malcontents. pursued lacks a detection lock on the pursuer, they’ll 

have no idea that they’re being chased.
Observer is... Mod Target Ship is... Mod Both ships make Int/Pilot opposed skill checks, 
Fighter +0 Fighter +3 each adding their spike drive rating to the roll. If the 
Frigate +1 Frigate +2 pursuer wins or ties, they force an engagement and 
Cruiser +2 Cruiser +1 the ships are moved into combat range. If the pursued 

ship wins, it gets six hours of distance, modified by any 
Capital +3 Capital +0 difference in spike drive ratings; a drive-1 ship being 
Minor Outpost +2 Station -2 chased by a drive-2 ship would have three hours, for 
Major Station +4 Avoiding planetary +2 example. It can use this time to reach a particular point 
Planet +5 population centers inside the region, or can put it toward an attempt to 

escape the region entirely. Ships with spike drive-1 en-
Passive sensors -2 gines need 48 hours to enter a new region, so they are 

The larger the ship, the better the sensors it will unlikely to avoid a determined pursuer; one with spike 
have, but the easier it is to spot it in space. Minor out- drive-3, on the other hand, can make the escape in only 
posts would reflect small deep-space habs or listening 16 hours. Some pilots may attempt to speed this up by 
posts, while major space stations would include most trimming their course.
military stations and other significant fortifications. A pursuing ship can also use this six hours to aim 
Ships that carefully avoid population centers when toward a different region, if it thinks it knows where 
landing on a world can mitigate some of the danger of the ship is running. Assuming they can keep the detec-
a planetary sensor network, leaving smugglers and pi- tion lock when the pursued ship slips over the sub-stel-
rates to prefer landing in remote, little-inhabited areas. lar border, they can end up close on their prey’s heels.



Sensors and Detection •113 

Scanning Planets and Ships mounted, where good boarding points might be on the 
Short-range scans of ships and planetary objects are rel- hull, whether the ship looks to be the product of a par-
atively simple affairs. Any scan of a ship within combat ticular world or culture, or simply to question wheth-
range will reveal the ship’s hull type, obvious weaponry er anything looks odd about the ship’s readings. The 
and damage, and registered ID code. A scan of a planet sensors can probe a meter or so beneath the hull skin, 
in orbit will always reveal basic information on atmo- but they can’t intrude on a ship’s computer network or 
sphere, geology, advanced energy-using surface com- provide a map of interior spaces.
munities, other ships in orbit, and any surface features When scanning a planet, a comms officer can ask 
designed to attract orbital interest. about apparent capitals or spaceports, major industrial 

Comms officers can attempt to interrogate the sites, unusual planetary weather patterns, unique aller-
scans, asking one question before rolling an Int/Pro- gens or atmospheric hazards, current local news trans-
gram skill check against difficulty 8. On a success, the missions, or identify hidden or low-tech communities 
question is answered, while a failure means that the that are large but do not have clear energy signatures.
data is inconclusive and no further questions can be If they have the Survey Sensor Array fitting, they 
asked of it that day. Each question after the first suc- can do orbital visual spying accurate enough to read 
cess that same day is asked at a cumulative +1 difficulty newsprint, in addition to asking questions about sub-
modifier. Questions should be simple and direct. terranean spaces, visible surface life forms of interest, 

When scanning a ship, a comms officer might crude maps of the interior spaces, and interesting en-
ask whether particular fittings or weapons have been ergy readings.

Maintenance and Repair
Sneaking In

Ships are expensive things to keep flying, and many The free merchant Grendel has just drilled into a 
adventuring crews find themselves taking somewhat new system using charts her captain stole from an 
dubious work just to get enough money to keep their unfortunate pirate. 
ship in the air. As it happens, a small pirate base is positioned 

in the region, placed there by its inhabitants to 
Spares, Repairs and Refueling keep an eye on any traffic from the adjacent sys-
Most ships have their repairs and maintenance done at tem. They get a chance to detect the Grendel, and 
a shipyard, but a ship can perform field maintenance roll the pirate comm officer’s skill bonus of +2 plus 
and repair if they have the necessary parts. One ton of another +2 for being a minor outpost, and a -2 
cargo space can hold 10,000 credits worth of spare parts. for using passive sensors to avoid alerting targets. 
Any time required is quadrupled, however. Their total is 12. The Grendel’s comms officer is 

Ship fuel costs a flat 500 credits per load. good, however, and gets a +2 for being a frig-
ate-class ship. His Int/Program skill roll is a 13, 

Six-Month Maintenance meaning the base has not detected the ship.
Every ship needs to spend 5% of its total non-crew cost Now the free merchant gets a chance to spot 
every six months in order to pay for basic maintenance. the station, also using passive sensors at a -2 pen-
Each such period that is skipped applies a -1 penalty to alty. The outpost is a very visible space station, and 
all ship skill checks and hit rolls. At -4, the ship gains a takes -2 on its opposed roll, while the frigate gains 
10% chance per month of breaking down entirely until a +1 on its check. The base rolls a 7 and the Grendel 
backlogged maintenance is repaired. At a shipyard, this rolls an 8. The frigate has a detection lock on the 
maintenance takes a day for a fighter hull, a week for a pirate base.
frigate or cruiser, and a month for a capital ship. Her captain decides to sneak further into the 

system. She can’t be sure the station hasn’t spotted 
Repairing Hulls and Systems her, but it’s made no obvious sign of it and she 
Fixing ship hit points can be done at a cost of 1,000 wants to investigate the local planets and their in-
credits per point, with up to the presiding engineer’s habitants. The Grendel’s drive-2 engine can cross 
Fix skill repaired in points each day. A disabled sys- over to a planet’s region with 24 hours of travel. 
tem can be jury-rigged back to functionality for one- This will give the station one more chance 
tenth the system’s cost and one day’s work per 25,000 to lock the ship, since it can try again in 24 hours. 
credits so spent. A jury-rigged system that is disabled Even if it does successfully lock the free merchant, 
again is destroyed. Full repairs of a disabled system cost however, the captain bets they can lose it when 
one-quarter of its original price. they transfer out of the solar region. The pirate 

Repairs made during combat do not need to be base might broadcast an alert to any other local al-
re-done or paid for afterwards, as they were performed lies, however, which could make things awkward.
before the damage could become critical and lasting.



114• Space Combat

Space Combat

The clash of ships in the void, the flash of silent ex- unfriendly, it’s in the charge of the gunners who man 
plosions and soundless death… these things are famil- this department. They’re the ones who fire a ship’s guns 
iar to interstellar adventurers, and a natural hazard of and make the targeting calculations necessary to snipe 
the profession. While most adventurers seek to avoid specific systems and weapons on a hostile target.
such hull-melting conflagrations of war, sometimes the Engineering keeps the ship flying when enemies 
choice is not their own. When two or more ships close are carving chunks out of her hull. They can perform 
to combat range with the intent to kill, it’s time to fight. damage control, boost the engines to speed a ship’s ma-

neuvers, and execute emergency repairs to get a dam-
The Combat Round aged system back online before it’s too late.
Space combat begins with a normal initiative roll, one The comms department doesn’t just handle in-
made by each ship involved in the combat. Each rolls ter-ship communications, but it also manages sensors, 
1d8 modified by the Intelligence or Dexterity modifier electronic warfare, and combat hacking duties. Their 
of the pilot, and they take their turns in order, with crew can baffle enemy targeting attempts, fool hostile 
PCs winning ties. Once every ship has had a turn, the sensors, and choke enemy computers with ECM.
round starts over from the top. Initiative is not rerolled. The captain is master of the ship and directs the 
A round of ship combat takes about 15 minutes, but other departments. On a warship, this discipline might 
Experts and Warriors can only use their special class be taut and automatic. On a ship piloted by PCs, obe-
abilities to reroll skill checks or ensure automatic hits dience may be less certain. Regardless, the captain can 
once per engagement. boost the effectiveness of other departments, direct 

On its turn, a ship’s captain decides in which order crew for perilous but necessary tasks, or convert oth-
its various departments will act: bridge, gunnery, en- erwise-crippling hits into more manageable crises.
gineering, comms, and captain. Each department then For player-run ships, every PC should be put in 
chooses actions, choosing either from their specific charge of one of these departments, preferably the one 
department or a general action available to all depart- that best suits their character’s skills. If a PC is totally 
ments. A department head can choose actions from incompetent for space combat, they can be given tem-
only one category; they can’t pick from both. Some of porary control of the NPC officer who actually is in 
these actions generate Command Points, allowing other charge of the department, and can run that NPC as 
departments to spend these points taking actions that their character during the fight. If the ship is so small 
require them. When all departments have acted, the that there is no NPC available to run the department, 
next ship in order can go. then the PC is treated as a supernumerary officer, and 

If the ship is an NPC ship, the GM can abbrevi- can only take actions from the general action list avail-
ate the process, giving it a fixed number of Command able to all departments.
Points based on its general crew quality, with the ship Sometimes there are fewer PCs than there are de-
being able to take whatever actions it needs using that partments. In that case, double-up the duties of two 
total. Fighters and civilian ships usually have 4 Com- or more departments on a single PC. That PC can 
mand Points, military or pirate ships have 5, native still only take actions from one departments per turn; 
spacers and highly-trained warships have 6, and the any departments they don’t take an action from are 
finest NPC crews in space can muster 7 points. assumed to use the Do Your Duty action, adding 1 Com-

mand Point to the ship’s available total. Thus, if a PC 
Ship Departments was in charge of both the bridge and the comms, she 
For purposes of interstellar combat, every ship is as- could take actions either from the bridge list, the com-
sumed to have five departments: bridge, gunnery, en- ms list, or the general list of actions. If she didn’t pick 
gineering, comms, and captain. A ship with too few any action from the bridge or comms list, the neglected 
crew to actually man these departments may have to department would simply use Do Your Duty to add +1 
double-up on staffing, but these five functions are the Command Point to the ship’s available total. For a sin-
ones that are critical during space combat, and every gle-seat fighter, the lone crewman might have all five 
ship has to be able to act on them. departments on his head. Such a pilot would be able to 

The bridge is where the ship’s piloting and naviga- take actions from any single department each round 
tion is done. This might be no more than the cramped with the other four providing 4 Command Points to 
cockpit of a starfighter or it might be a cavernous cen- fuel that action.
tral control node in the bowels of a battleship. The Sometimes the PCs may want to swap depart-
bridge department handles attempts to escape combat, ments in mid-battle for some reason, or to replace a 
perform evasive maneuvers, or pursue a fleeing enemy. department head who has been incapacitated. They 

The gunnery department is in charge of the ship’s may do so at the start of any given combat turn pro-
weaponry. If it’s used to blow pieces out of something vided that the department heads involved do not object.



Space Combat •115 

Actions and Command Points Attacks and Damage
At the start of every ship’s turn, the captain decides the When a ship fires a weapon, it can choose any target 
order in which the departments will take their action. involved in the combat. Either the gunnery department 
In the chaos of combat, she can give directions to the head, an NPC, or a nominated PC may make the attack, 
heads, but they are not obligated to follow them. but a given gunner can man only one gun a round. The 

When a department’s turn comes up, the PC in gunnery head is always the one to spend Command 
charge chooses actions, either from their department Points to fire, but their nominees may be the ones ac-
list or the general action list. Some actions may re- tually manning the guns and rolling the attacks.
quire skill checks to execute properly, while others are The gunner rolls a normal hit roll, using their 
automatically successful. Some actions may require base attack bonus plus the better of their Intelligence 
Command Points to be spent in order to attempt them, or Dexterity mods, plus their Shoot skill. If flying a 
while others give Command Points. A few prohibit the fighter-class ship, Pilot may be used in place of Shoot. 
PC from doing any other action that round. Foci that normally give bonuses to Shoot attacks, such 

Barring these actions, a department head can take as Gunslinger, do not apply to ship combat unless specif-
as many actions as they have Command Points to spend ically noted as doing so. The luck ability of the Warrior 
on them. A gunnery chief with 4 Command Points, for class may be used once per fight to hit with ship guns, 
example, could use the Fire One Weapon action twice, but cannot be used to negate a hit against their ship.
spending 2 Command Points each time, or he could If the hit roll equals or exceeds the target ship’s 
use the Fire All Guns action once, spending 3 Command Armor Class, the attack is a success and the attacker 
Points and leaving 1 left. The department head does not may roll damage, again modified by the better of the 
need to get permission to spend points from the rest of gunner’s Intelligence or Dexterity modifiers. This dam-
the crew; if he decides to burn the points to open fire age is lessened by the target’s Armor score, which may 
when the rest of the crew wanted him to save them, in turn be negated by a gun’s Armor-Piercing quality. 
that’s too bad for the rest of the crew. A traitorous or A successful hit by a plasma beam, for example, does 
uncooperative department head can only be stopped 3d6 damage plus the gunner’s attribute modifier, with 
by PC intervention with the Deal With a Crisis action. an Armor Piercing quality of 10. Against a free mer-

After every department has acted, all excess Com- chant with an Armor score of 2, the full damage of the 
mand Points are lost. Ships normally start their turns beam gets through, as the AP 10 cancels out all the 
with 0 Command Points. merchant’s Armor. 



116• Space Combat

Armor can negate all damage from a hit if it’s Handling Crises
strong enough. If Armor completely negates the attack, To resolve a Crisis, a PC needs to take the Deal With 

the hit cannot disable systems. a Crisis general action on their department turn. They 
Sufficiently skilled gunners can use the Target Sys- must explain what they are doing to solve the problem 

tem action to aim a shot at a particular weapon system, to the GM, who will then tell them what combination 
engine, or other fitting that seems vulnerable to the of attribute and skill they should roll. The usual diffi-
GM. On such a hit, the damage is halved, rounded up, culty of resolving a crisis is 10, though the GM may 
before Armor is applied. If any damage gets through, increase or decrease that difficulty by up to 2 points 
that system is disabled and cannot be used until it is either way depending on how bad the Crisis is and how 
repaired. Engines lose one drive rank instead, so that useful the PC’s plan is to resolve it.
a drive-2 spike drive becomes a drive-1 until repaired. If the PC succeeds in the roll, the Crisis is ended. 
Disabled systems hit again or drives reduced below Continuing Crises no longer apply their penalty to the 
drive-0 are destroyed, and cannot be repaired during ship, and acute Crises are defused before disaster can 
combat. A ship with destroyed engines cannot perform strike. If they fail, a continuing Crisis is unchanged and 
any bridge actions and may be boarded at an attacking an acute one is yet unresolved.
ship’s leisure, assuming its guns are also disabled. More than one PC can try to resolve a Crisis, either 

If a ship is reduced to zero hit points, fighter-class making an independent attempt if they have a relevant 
hulls are instantly destroyed with all hands. Larger skill, or using their talents to aid the main responder 
ships are mortally damaged. Such crippled ships can with the usual rules for aiding another’s skill check.
take no action and will explode within 2d6 minutes The Deal With a Crisis general action can also be 
unless the chief engineer succeeds in an Int/Fix skill used to get a scene’s worth of general activity aboard 
check against difficulty 10. On a failure, the explosion is the ship. If a xenomorphic monster suddenly breaches 
inevitable, while on a success the ship merely becomes the ship’s hull during a battle with its alien mothership, 
a burnt-out hulk with all systems destroyed. If suffi- two of the PCs might take the Deal With a Crisis action 
ciently vast amounts of repair supplies are still intact in to spend a scene battling the beast in the guts of the ship 
the hold, a determined crew might be able to jury-rig while the rest of the party tries to keep the ship fighting.
the maimed ship into temporary operation.

Ship Crises
Instead of accepting some particularly gruesome hit or Running a Crisis
disabling attack, a PC ship can instead choose to accept When a Crisis hits a ship, the GM should describe 
a Crisis. The attack or the disabling hit is then negated, it in a concrete way. A Crew Lost crisis, for example, 
with no damage done. Instead, the GM rolls on the may be described as “A damage control squad has 
Crisis table to find out what dire event happened as been trapped in the engine room and tempera-
a consequence of the hit, instead of the ship damage. tures are rising dangerously high.” A Hull Breach 

Some of these Crises are continuing. They will might be described as “That last hit drove a sup-
continue to plague the ship until a PC can solve them port column through a capacitor bank; it’s about 
with the Deal With a Crisis general action. Usually this to explode.” It should be described as a specific 
involves a skill check at difficulty 10, but multiple PCs problem that threatens the ship.
can choose to take the Deal With a Crisis action to co- In turn, when a PC chooses to Deal With a 

operate in resolving the problem that round. Crisis, they should indicate what it is exactly that 
Some of these Crises are acute. The PCs must re- they’re trying to do. A PC with Fix might declare 

solve them before the end of the ship’s next turn or else that they’re trying to pump coolant into the en-
something very bad will happen. gine room, or a telekinetic PC might try to forcibly 

A ship can accept only one Crisis per round, not eject the capacitor bank before it can explode.
including the Into the Fire or Keep it Together captain Don’t worry about being too technically pre-
actions which may be taken at the captain’s discretion. cise with descriptions, or painstakingly deciding 
Thus, if the ship is hit twice, only one of those hits can whether the ship has available coolant supplies 
be converted into a Crisis unless the captain uses one or whether the capacitor is one ton or two. De-
of these actions. A ship accepts a Crisis if any of the cide whether or not the plan the PC is declaring 
department heads requests it, even if the rest of the is plausible or not in the general sense, and set the 
heads don’t want one. Thus, if the ship’s main gun is hit, difficulty accordingly.
the gunnery chief can request a Crisis to prevent the hit Extremely good plans or applicable abilities 
even if the rest of the crew was against it. might make the Crisis resolution check as easy as 

To simplify ship combat, NPC ships do not nor- difficulty 8, while a very marginal plan that doesn’t 
mally accept more than one Crisis per space combat, seem likely to help might be difficulty 12. What-
at most. They usually just take the damage or negative ever you do, keep it quick; don’t drag it out in play.
effects of hits straight until facing imminent ruin.



Space Combat •117 

Ship Combat Actions

Every PC can take one or more actions per ship round. 
PCs who are department heads can pick actions from Engineering Actions
their department. Any PC can pick from the general Boost Engines (2 CP): Roll Int/Fix versus difficulty 8. On 
actions. Some actions prohibit any other act that round. a success, the ship’s Speed is increased by 2 until 

Most actions have a cost in Command Points. the start of the ship’s next turn.
Usually, some PCs choose to Do Your Duty or go Above Damage Control (3 CP): Roll Int/Fix versus difficulty 
and Beyond to generate Command Points, while others 7. On a success, repair a number of lost hit points 
then spend them on actions for their department. All equal to your Fix skill times 2 for fighter hulls, 3 
unspent Command Points are lost at the round’s end. for frigates, 4 for cruisers, and 6 for capital-class 

NPC ships usually have a base number of Com- hulls. Each attempt of this action after the first in 
mand Points they can spend each round, and may pick a fight increases its difficulty by a cumulative +1.
actions freely to spend them. For simplicity, NPC ships Emergency Repairs (3 CP): Roll Int/Fix versus difficulty 
can’t usually generate more Command Points with 8. On a success, a disabled system is repaired or 
their actions and can’t normally take Captain actions. a damage-degraded drive has its rating increased 

by 1. Destroyed systems cannot be fixed this way.
Bridge Actions
Escape Combat (4 CP): Roll an opposed Int/Pilot or Dex/ Gunnery Actions

Pilot skill check plus your ship’s Speed against the Fire All Guns (3 CP): Gunners fire all weapons mounted 
fastest opponent’s skill check plus their ship’s on the ship, designating targets as they wish.
Speed. On a win, all enemy ships gain one point Fire One Weapon (2 CP): A gunner fires a single ship’s 
of Escape. If an enemy ship gets three points, after weapon of their choice.
three uses of this maneuver, your ship gets away Target Systems (1 CP): A Fire One Weapon action you 
from that ship and is no longer in combat with it. take this round may target a ship’s weapons, en-

Evasive Maneuvers (2 CP): Roll Int or Dex/Pilot against gine, or fittings the GM decides are vulnerable. 
difficulty 9 to add your Pilot skill to the ship’s AC Such targeted attacks take -4 to hit. On a hit, do 
until its next turn.  Usable once per round at most. half damage before applying Armor. If damage 

Pursue Target (3 CP): Opposed Int/Pilot or Dex/Pilot gets through the system is disabled or drive is 
skill check plus Speed against the target ship’s skill degraded by 1 level. Disabled systems hit again 
check plus Speed. On a win, you shed one point are destroyed. You may take this action more than 
of Escape rating the target ship may have on you. once to aim additional shots you may fire.

Captain Actions General Actions
Into the Fire (0 CP): Accept a Crew Lost Crisis and gain All these general actions are exclusive; if you take one 

your Lead skill plus one in Command Points. You of these actions you can do nothing else in the round, 
may do this at most once per round. either before or after you take the action.

Keep It Together (0 CP): Nullify a successful enemy hit Above and Beyond (0 CP): Push yourself to help the ship 
and roll a Crisis instead. You can use this action or its crew. Pick an attribute and skill check and 
in Instant response to an enemy hit but you may explain how you’re using it to help the ship. If the 
only use it once per round. GM agrees, roll it against difficulty 9. On a success, 

Support Department (0 CP): Choose a department. One gain your skill level in Command Points plus one. 
action that department takes will require 2 fewer On a failure, take -1 Command Point.
Command Points. You can do this once per round. Deal With a Crisis (0 CP): Explain what you are doing 

to solve a Crisis and roll the relevant skill check. 
Comms Actions The difficulty is usually 10, plus or minus 2 de-
Crash Systems (2 CP): Roll an opposed Int/Program pending on the situation and the effectiveness of 

check against a targeted ship. On a success, it starts your action. On a success, the Crisis is resolved. 
its next turn with a Command Point penalty equal You may also use this action to aid another PC in 
to your Program skill. resolving a Crisis, or to take one scene’s worth of 

Defeat ECM (2 CP): Roll an opposed Int/Program other actions around the ship.
against a targeted ship. On a success, any attacks Do Your Duty (0 CP): The ship gains 1 Command Point. 
this round by your ship against the target get a hit PCs who head more than one department can act 
bonus equal to twice your Program skill. only in one of them; the rest automatically take 

Sensor Ghost (2 CP): Succeed on a difficulty 9 Int/Pro- this action. If invoked by a PC, they must name 
gram check to gain your Program as an AC bonus some plausible act the PC is doing to be useful, and 
until the next turn. Usable once per round at most. can’t do the same act two rounds in a row.



118• Space Combat

Ship Crises

Once per round, a ship may choose to accept a Crisis d10 Ship Crisis Type
instead of taking an enemy hit. They must choose to 

1 Armor Loss Continuing
do so immediately after damage is rolled, and only one 
player needs to request the Crisis to get it even if the 2 Cargo Loss Acute
rest of the party doesn’t want it. Once the Crisis is ac- 3 Crew Lost Acute
cepted, the hit is negated and the GM rolls on the table. 4 Engine Lock Continuing

The captain may also choose to voluntarily accept 
5 Fuel Bleed Acute

a Crisis through their Keep It Together or Into the Fire 

department actions. Use of these actions doesn’t count 6 Haywire Systems Continuing
against the one-voluntary-Crisis-per-round maximum. 7 Hull Breach Acute

Some Crises are continuing. They will apply a 
8 System Damage Continuing

penalty to the ship that continues until some PC suc-
cessfully performs a 9 Target Decalibration Continuing

Deal With a Crisis action.
Other Crises are acute. They inflict no immediate 10 VIP Imperiled Acute

negative consequence, but if the PCs don’t resolve it 
by the end of the next combat round, an unpleasant Engine Lock: The ship’s engine has been jammed or 
consequence will ensue. The Crisis is then removed. control circuits have gone non-responsive. Until 

The same Crisis rolled more than once will stack resolved, no bridge actions can be taken, though 
on the ship, though hits to empty cargo holds or dry the pilot can still perform general actions.
fuel tanks may not be much of a problem to the ship. Fuel Bleed: The ship’s fuel tanks have been holed or 

emergency vents have been force-triggered by 
Dealing With a Crisis battle damage. If not resolved by the end of the 
Any PC can Deal With a Crisis by taking that gener- next round, the ship will jettison all fuel except the 
al action and describing what they’re doing to solve minimal amount needed for in-system operation.
the problem. They then roll an applicable skill check Haywire Systems: Critical command links have been 
against difficulty 10, possibly modified by up to plus or damaged or disordered by the hit. Until resolved, 
minus two depending on the GM’s judgment of their the ship starts each round at -2 Command Points. 
general plan and its likelihood of being helpful. On a Multiple such Crises can stack this penalty, crip-
success, the Crisis is resolved. All Crises are considered pling a ship until the Crises are resolved.
resolved at the end of an engagement. Hull Breach: The hull has been damaged in a way that is 

currently non-critical but is about to tear open an 
Crises important compartment or crumple on vital sys-

Armor Loss: The hit melted an important patch of ship tems. If not resolved by the end of the next round, 
armor, cracked an internal support, or exposed a the ship will take damage: 1d10 for fighter-class 
sensitive system. Until resolved, the ship’s Armor hulls, 2d10 for frigates, 3d10 for cruisers, and 4d10 
rating is halved, rounded down. for capital hulls, all ignoring Armor.

Cargo Loss: The hit has gored open a cargo bay, threat- System Damage: One of the ship’s systems has been 
ening to dump the hold or expose delicate con- cooked by the hit. The GM randomly picks a 
tents to ruinous damage. If not resolved by the end weapon, fitting, or engine; that system is disabled 
of the next round, lose d10*10% of the ship’s cargo. as if hit with a targeted shot, with drives suffering 

Crew Lost: Brave crew risk their lives to keep damaged a 1 point drive level decrease. Disabled systems hit 
systems operating. Describe the danger they face. by this Crisis or drives reduced below drive-0 are 
If the Crisis is not resolved by the end of the next destroyed and cannot be repaired during combat.
round, 10% of the ship’s maximum crew are inca- Target Decalibration: The gunnery computers are 
pacitated, not counting any Extended Life Support hopelessly confused and cannot lock the ship’s 
fittings. Half these crewmen are dead or perma- weaponry on a target until this Crisis is resolved.
nently disabled, and the other half return to duty VIP Imperiled: Shipboard damage threatens a random 
in a week. Extended Medbay fittings halve the num- PC or important NPC. That victim must imme-
ber of dead and crippled. If the ship has run out diately roll a Physical saving throw; on a success, 
of NPC crew when it takes this Crisis, a random they lose half their hit points, and on a failure they 
PC must roll a Physical save; on a success, they are mortally wounded. NPC crew can make a free 
lose half their hit points, while on a failure, they attempt to stabilize the downed VIP using their 
are mortally wounded. If not stabilized by the end usual NPC skill bonus. If the NPC fails, and no PC 
of the ship’s turn through some PC taking a Deal takes a Deal With a Crisis action to successfully sta-
With A Crisis action to heal them, they will die. bilize them by the end of the ship’s turn, they die.



Space Combat •119 

The Thunder of the Guns
The free merchant Grendel finds herself engaging the ing. Thus, instead of trying to fire the sandcaster this 
Sacred Wrath, a patrol boat of the Luminous Hege- round, he decides to blaze away exclusively with the 
mony determined to stop the Grendel before it can laser, using the Fire One Weapon action. Firing one 
deliver its cargo of military supplies to the rebel out- weapon costs 2 Command Points and he has 5 left, 
post that contracted the ship. Captain Wilhelmina plus the captain’s Support Department action to give 
Stokes knows she’s substantially outclassed by the him a zero-cost shot.
patrol boat, but she trusts her comrades and is de- The gunner is a grizzled Warrior and uses his 
termined to blast her way through. class ability to make the first shot an automatic hit. 

The combat begins with an initiative roll. The He rolls 1d4 for damage, +1 for his Dexterity modifi-
Grendel’s pilot rolls 1d8 plus the best of his Intel- er, and gets a 3. The multifocal laser’s armor-piercing 
ligence or Dexterity modifiers, getting a 6. The quality of 20 overwhelms the patrol boat’s Armor 
Wrath’s pilot rolls a 4, so Grendel goes first. of 5, but since he’s Targeting Systems, his damage 

Grendel starts her turn with 0 Command Points. is halved, rounded up. The patrol boat takes 2 hit 
Captain Stokes decides that she’ll act first among the points of damage… but its plasma beam is now dis-
crew, and uses the Support Department action to aid abled until the boat’s crew can perform repairs.
the gunnery department; one action the gunner The gunner’s not satisfied; he wants that gun 
takes will be 2 Command Points cheaper than usual. wrecked. He Fires One Weapon again for 2 CP, Tar-

The ship still has no Command Points, how- geting Systems once more for 1 CP, rolling a hit roll at 
ever, so Captain Stokes tells the comms chief to go -4 and using his Shoot skill and Dexterity attribute to 
next. Feeling daring, the comms chief decides to go modify his attack bonus. He hits with a 15 and does 
Above and Beyond to help the ship, overclocking the another 2 damage, destroying the gun.
ship’s computing core. The GM decides this is an The GM decides that the patrol boat’s captain 
Int/Program skill check, so the comms chief rolls it is willing to go to extremes to prevent this, and lets 
against difficulty 9. He fails his first roll, but uses his him accept a Crisis instead. The GM rolls 1d10 and 
Expert class reroll benefit to try again, and gets it the gets the Hull Breach crisis; if the boat can’t resolve 
second time. The ship gains 3 Command Points for it by the end of the next round, it’ll take 2d10 hit 
the comms chief’s Program-2 skill. points of damage that ignores Armor, but for now 

Stokes considers letting the gunner blaze away the gunner’s second hit is negated. The gunner has 
now, but she wants to go for a real torrent of fire to 2 CP left, so he burns those and his captain-supplied 
open the fight, so she asks the bridge pilot to act next free shot on two more attacks, both of which miss. 
to build more Command Points. He chooses to Do The round ends, and if the Grendel had any CP left it 
Your Duty, adding 1 CP and declaring that he’s lining would lose them now.
the ship up for the shot. Being a properly-trained military crew, the 

Three Command Points aren’t enough for the Sacred Wrath has 5 Command Points. Her captain 
captain, so despite the gunner’s entreaties, she choos- knows that her absolute priority is getting her gun 
es for the engineer to go next. She also plays it safe, back online, so he spends 3 points to do Emergency 

deciding to Do Your Duty and feed power to the guns. Repairs from the engineer actions. The GM rolls her 
Lastly, there’s a sixth PC in the crew, a storytell- crew’s default +2 skill bonus and gets a 9, enough to 

er with absolutely no applicable space-faring skills. fix the plasma beam and remove its disabled status.
Even though he is no department head, the captain That leaves the NPC ship with 2 Command 
nominates him to act next, since every PC gets to act Points left, which is just enough to open fire. The 
each round. Able to take only general actions, the gunner blasts away with the plasma beam, using his 
storyteller chants a mighty lay of battle to encourage hit bonus of +4 to get a 17, enough to hit the Grendel. 
his comrades on to glory. The GM lets him roll a The plasma beam does 12 points of damage to the 
Cha/Perform skill check to go Above and Beyond, and free merchant, its AP 10 defeating the target’s Armor.
he succeeds, adding 3 more Command Points from Captain Stokes can’t handle a hit like this and 
his Perform-2 skill. immediately accepts a Crisis. The GM rolls an Armor 

Now, at last, with 8 Command Points, the cap- Loss result, halving the Grendel’s already-sad Armor.
tain gives the gunner her signal. The gunner decides The next round then begins. The PCs have the 
that it’s absolutely critical to defang the patrol boat edge, as the Wrath is going to need to Deal With a Cri-

before it can open up with its plasma beam. He sis or take a heavy hit at round’s end. If the Grendel’s 
chooses to Target Systems with his attack, spending gunner can’t shut down that plasma beam, however, 
1 CP. He knows the free merchant’s sandcaster has the free merchant runs the risk of eating more hits 
no chance of piercing the patrol boat’s armor, but than it can survive… or trying to evade those hits and 
his multifocal laser can cut through the ship’s plat- rolling a Crisis her crew can’t handle.






THE HISTORY OF SPACE
The default setting of Stars Without Number is a far dimensions, forming both navigational beacons and 
future age in which the sprawling, glorious domain anchor-points that enabled transit up and down the 
of human space has been reduced to a scattering of dimensional spectrum. So long as a spike drive had a 
squabbling powers and long-lost worlds. The ancient star to launch from and a star to bring it down, it could 
domain of humanity has shrunken with the collapse ride the metadimensional currents in a headlong rush 
of the psi-powered Jump Gates that once stitched the of superluminal speed.
remote regions of the frontier into the teeming worlds The initial transit along a course was always the 
of the human core. most dangerous. The metadimensional currents were 

Now, almost six hundred years after the catastro- unmapped on those routes, and a navigator had to 
phe that ended the Golden Age of Man, new hope rises make regular course corrections in hope of finding a 
from the wreckage of a fallen empire. current that would bring them to their course before 

the spike drive’s protective bubble broke down in the 
In the Beginning metadimensional environment.
Humanity’s interstellar history began in a musty insta- Once the initial journey had been made, course 
fab laboratory on a remote coast in northern Greenland rutters could be shared with other ships. So long as 
in the year 2108. A small army of jury-rigged microfab ships regularly made the transit, any shifts in the cur-
plants and hotwired autofacs had been churning for rents could be recorded. If a route lay fallow for too 
years, painstakingly realizing the plans of their creator. long, however, the slow creep of currents would render 
Dr. Tiberius Crohn was an insular lunatic of the first the rutters worse than useless, and a fresh course would 
water, a laughingstock among physicists and a regular need to be plotted by some brave crew.
font of absurd claims. Were it not for his admitted tal- Crohn’s discovery was announced by the sudden 
ent at wrangling autofacs he would likely have vanished launch of his retrofitted spacecraft-laboratory from the 
into the twenty-second century’s faceless proletarian Greenland hot zone. A number of orbital weapons plat-
mass without so much as a ripple. forms attempted to bring it down, but the spike drive 

His talents had gotten him the parts and resources provided such a wildly anomalous maneuver profile 
to establish his laboratory in the radioactive wilds of that the tracking algorithms were hopelessly confused. 
Greenland, not far from the hot zone left by a missile Earthside watch stations followed him out to the edge 
from the Russo-European War. The glow masked the of the solar system, dutifully recording his ship’s impos-
peculiar emissions from his test units, but in 2108 his sible velocity. At the very rim of the system the sensors 
work finally reached fruition. Crohn had invented the picked up a strange gravitic surge, and he was gone.
spike drive, the faster-than-light engine that would lift He returned thirteen days later, broadcasting a ra-
humanity to the stars. dio transmission that not only included data on Alpha 

Even now, a thousand years later, researchers Centauri that could only have been acquired through 
still wonder how Crohn managed to devise the math- on-site surveying, but also included the necessary data 
ematics and theories that supported the spike drive’s for the reconstruction of the spike drive. Between the 
creation. Widespread claims of “alien influence” were observations of the tracking stations and the content 
debunked by later Mandate historians, but rumors of of the signal, there was no doubt of it; mad old Crohn 
these “Mentors” are still stock space legends. had actually done it.

Some of the axioms involved defied all percepti- Even today, no one is entirely certain how he man-
ble reality, and the theories made certain assumptions aged it. A prototype spike drive would have required 
about the fabric of the universe that spun off at least a six days of metadimensional travel to reach Alpha 
dozen new religions within the first two hundred years Centauri and drill down into mundane space. Crohn 
of the discovery. The spike drive was a window on a claimed to be alone aboard the ship, but such would 
universe far stranger and vaster than experimenters have required him to remain awake and navigating the 
had thought possible. uncharted drill course for six straight days, all without 

Through a delicate gravitic twisting of the uni- any hint of prior experience. The creed that later be-
versal substrate beneath a ship, the spike drive drove came known as the Book of the Sky refers to it as “the 
it “upward” through a spectrum of dimensional fre- Night Journey of the Prophet Tiberius” and considers 
quencies. The ship vanished from mundane, “luminal” it the founding event of the faith.
space and was thrust into the metadimensions. These Tiberius himself promptly drilled back out into 
inchoate realms of vast energy currents and formless metaspace once his transmission had been sent. He was 
masses were extremely hostile to unprepared ships, never seen again. To this day, thirteen known religious 
but their gravitic currents propelled a ship at speeds sects are convinced that he was translated directly into 
impossible in the mundane universe. Suitably massive the presence of God as a fitting reward to the opener 
objects such as stars cast a “shadow” into these meta- of the celestial ways.



122• The History of Space

The First Wave of Colonization were forbidden to colonize worlds of their own for 
Exclusivity was impossible with this new discovery. reasons of “social harmony” and “interstellar security”. 
Overnight, every industrialized nation on Earth began More than a few of these groups defied the new Man-
a frantic rush to build spike drive-equipped starships, date and sought worlds beyond their reach in the far 
each nation fearing to be left behind in claiming the dark. Deprived of the usual sources of support, most 
stars above. Paradoxically, earthside tensions faded rap- were never heard from again.
idly as the disposition of this spit of land or that patch Even with these new limits, the Terran Mandate 
of oil seemed to be trivial compared to the wealth that was hard-pressed to contain the colonial worlds. There 
awaited in the sky. was little in the way of actual fighting between the col-

Initial exploration revealed that the spike drives onies, as few had the ships or manpower to spare, but 
had a maximum range before the corrosive effect of the here and there the more zealous splinter groups or 
metadimensional environment fatally degraded their dedicated ideologues could not bear to live in peace 
protective bubbles of mundane space. It was necessary with their neighbors. The Mandate kept a loose sort 
to hop from star to star, reaching more distant stellar of discipline over the Rim worlds but by the year 2260 
bodies by progressive advance. In the course of these direct control was tenuous at best.
explorations numerous exotic planetary bodies were 
discovered. The first one habitable by human beings MES and the Psionic Authority
was a barren mudball with an oxygen-rich atmosphere It was during the peak of the First Wave, in 2240, that 
discovered in 2113. Dubbed Renaissance by its Greater the first instances of a frightening new syndrome ap-
European discoverers, it drove the other Terran na- peared in the children of starship crew members. Per-
tions outward in an even greater frenzy of exploratory haps one in ten thousand of these children would be-
acquisitiveness. gin to exhibit strange and inexplicable powers. Some 

Pan-Indian scouts discovered the first life-bearing time around puberty, abilities manifested that ranged 
world in 2150. The primordial soup that covered the from an intuitive vision of the immediate future, to 
water world of Pranashakti served as a research sub- inexplicable mind-reading, to powers of superluminal 
ject for a generation of xenobiologists. The excitement teleportation. Children who exercised these abilities 
was only heightened when an American survey craft invariably suffered progressive and permanent neural 
discovered the ancient alien ruins on the mist-shroud- damage leading either to death or permanent insanity. 
ed moon called Typhon. Their creators had vanished A dozen uses, two dozen… sooner or later the damage 
more than 40,000 years ago, but the scanty remains overwhelmed the victim. Only by completely avoiding 
showed evidence of a technologically sophisticated cul- use of these powers could a child’s mind be saved.
ture possessing a humanoid anatomy not wholly unlike Dubbed “Metadimensional Extroversion Syn-
that of humankind. drome”, or “MES” by researchers, these subjects were 

This First Wave of colonization sent humanity in a gathered for extensive testing and examination. Par-
steadily expanding sphere from the green fields of Ter- ents were told that the children would be taught ways 
ra. By 2200, most habitable worlds within a year’s spike of controlling and suppressing their abilities, but most 
drive travel had at least a handful of human inhabitants. modern researchers believe that some among the 
Numerous political and religious splinter groups took children were used as guinea pigs in terrible experi-
to the heavens once asteroid mining brought the price ments meant to quantify this new power. Whatever 
of a spike drive-equipped starship within the reach of a the means, the investigators soon learned that “Messes” 
large corporation. Humanity was growing beyond the were actually serving as living channels for waves of 
reach of its leaders. metadimensional energy.

The power was shaped and focused by the wield-
Retrenchment and the Mandate er’s neural pathways. Mere meat was never meant to 
The governments of Terra grew increasingly con- endure the kind of energies that boiled through a Mess, 
cerned with their far-flung colonists. Even the fastest and neural pathways were left scorched or burnt out 
spike drive courier couldn’t reach the Rim worlds in entirely by use of the powers. Every test was destruc-
less than four months, and projecting military force tive. The only question was whether repeated use of the 
at such a distance was beyond the power of all but the powers would kill the Mess’ body first or take their san-
strongest nations. Rather than let their colonists slip ity. Researchers also discovered that once the energies 
entirely out of their control, the greater powers on had finally burnt out a victim’s mind, the charred brain 
Terra agreed to form the Terran Mandate, an organi- pathways were effectively immune to further damage. 
zation dedicated to policing human space and exerting An insane Mess, or “feral” could use their powers with 
the authority of Terran governments over the far-flung impunity, and usually did.
colony worlds. It wasn’t until 2275 that these shadowy researches 

Furthermore, expansion beyond the current Rim finally bore fruit. The damage to a Mess’s mind could 
worlds was forbidden. Splinter groups, cults, and mi- not be avoided, but by individualized programs of 
crocultures were required to live within the pale and meditation, focus, and mental training, the damage 



The History of Space •123 

could be routed through less critical areas of the brain. able biomes that draw the most interest from human 
A properly-trained “psychic”, as they were now called, explorers. Further exploration might reveal legions 
could use their powers extensively before the charge of supercondensed life forms in the core of gas giant 
threatened to overflow their existing channels and they worlds, or flocks of hydrogen-based webs floating in 
were required to rest and recuperate. the darkness between stars.

Formulating these programs of study required a Some species owe nothing to human form. These 
trained psychic mentor to shape the basic curriculum Others are alien in a way that no oxygen-breather could 
into the correct sequence of meditations for a given possibly be. Some are composed of silicon or alien earth 
pupil. Despite the best efforts of researchers, it proved compounds, such as the “lithomorphs” and their plan-
impossible to impart this education through record- etoid-ships. Others are congeries of spherical atmo-
ed means of instruction. A living, psychically-active sphere-bubbles, or sentient interference-patterns set 
metapsion tutor properly educated in the training pro- up in the oceans of an ammonia-covered liquid world. 
tocols was mandatory in teaching new psychics. The Others are almost invariably too different in mind 

In an attempt to control the provision of psychic and needs for humans to communicate with them. 
mentors, the Terran Mandate inaugurated the Psionic Their acts of violence are inexplicable and seemingly 
Authority. The PA grew to be a quiet but pervasive random, and their purposes defy human comprehen-
organization throughout human space, taking young sion. Psychics who attempt to contact the mind of an 
MES sufferers into its care for training. The rarity of Other risk their sanity under waves of awareness ut-
MES left psychics largely as figures of mystery and no terly unlike the thoughts of a fleshly brain.
little fear to less gifted humans. Psychics could often 
make vast sums of money with their powers, but many Pretech, Psitech, and the Gates
worlds established sharp restrictions on psychic activi- Psionic Authority researchers had not halted their 
ties… and then often employed government-sponsored study of MES energies after their initial training break-
psychics who could ignore the strictures. throughs. Official histories credit the discoveries to the 

courage of a few psychics willing to conduct destructive, 
First Contacts dangerous experiments on their own minds. Legends 
As these changes rippled through human culture, the speak more of criminal psychics and bewildered young 
species found itself no longer alone in the cosmos. The Messes “encouraged” to cooperate in experiments that 
steady expansion of human space discovered more than eventually claimed their sanity or their lives.
empty ruins on several habitable worlds. The Young Whatever the source of the data, the Psionic Au-
Races such as the Kont and Ualub were found inhab- thority was able to formulate new techniques of psychic 
iting their ancestral worlds, diligently building their power. These abilities were usually very subtle and es-
way towards Bronze Age technologies. Some species oteric, microscopic adjustments of ambient universal 
seemed to be the decaying remnants of a former empire, constants that allowed for the manufacture of materi-
such as the handful of used-up worlds that housed the als and products that were simply impossible to create 
weary race of Mettau and their cities of dancing glass. with technology bound to the mundane world’s laws. 
These Elder Races had all had their time in the sun, tens Atoms and molecules danced to the will of these fabri-
or hundreds of thousands of years ago, only to fall prey cator psychics, and new wonders were born from the 
to internecine strife, vainglorious experimentation, or factories of humanity.
sheer cultural ennui. The introduction of psychic fabrication marked 

Some of these alien races were strong and vigorous the development of “pretech”, the high science and ar-
still, though usually fresh from their own technological tifice of the Golden Age of Man. Pretech artifacts were 
youth. A few short, sharp border wars usually settled marvelous works, most of them performing some mir-
matters in humanity’s favor, and even those wars that acle of energy manipulation or material science. Pre-
were not so successfully prosecuted lost mankind only a tech spike drives doubled the maximum reach of a drill 
few worlds within easy reach of their rivals. More often, course, and pretech drugs and biotech gave humankind 
these races formed uneasy trade pacts with humanity, several centuries of hale good health before age might 
exchanging examples of strange alien technology and claim them.
art for the science of human worlds. The greatest accomplishment of pretech, however, 

The majority of sentient alien species that humani- was in the development of “psitech”, a complex melding 
ty discovered shared roughly similar humanoid dimen- of psychofabricated pretech components and psionical-
sions. Called “the Like” by xenobiologists, controversy ly-active materials. Psitech devices could channel and 
still bubbles over the seeming prevalence of humanoid amplify a psychic’s abilities to a remarkable degree. Psi-
form among alien races. Some scientists suggest that tech was never common, given the rarity of psychics 
the humanoid shape is simply the one most suitable to themselves, but it found regular employment in pre-
the expression of sentience. Others find this explana- tech manufactories.
tion too simplistic, and believe that humanoid shapes The greatest accomplishment of psitech, in turn, 
are simply most suitable to the kind of human-habit- was the development of the Jump Gates. These mas-



124• The History of Space

sive rings of psitech resonators floated at the far rim arguments between ideologies, religions, and simple 
of a solar system, wide enough to receive the slowboat differences of ambition. Maltech research began to 
freighters that lumbered out from planetary orbits. take root on more isolated worlds, with forbidden 
With the help of a choir of master psychic teleporters, research into unbraked AIs, replicant nanotech, and 
these ships would be hurled for scores of light years weapons of planetary destruction. Some worlds began 
across the galaxy, emerging from a Jump Gate held to experiment with human genomic modification be-
in waiting at their destination point. The weeks or yond anything that convention had permitted. These 
months of spike drive travel that would otherwise be eugenics cultists sought the wholesale improvement 
required were compressed into a few days. of the human genetic legacy despite the terrible costs 

The Jump Gates quickly replaced spike drive trav- in maladaptive mutation and instability. Forces of the 
el throughout the core regions of human space. The Terran Mandate’s Perimeter agency tried to contain 
only check on their expansion was finding the nec- these researches, but often were simply too few and 
essary number of master teleporters to power them, too poorly supported to do more than report on events.
and the great expense of shipping components out to The Golden Age of Man was already strained by 
more distant worlds unable to fabricate them on-site. the pressures of these squabbling worlds and a Mandate 
By 2450, almost all core and Rim worlds were served by grown senile. Its deathblow was yet to come.
Jump Gates. The ease and cheapness of mass interstellar 
transport caused some worlds to specialize as agricul- The Scream and the Silence
tural planets and other worlds to rely on interstellar In 2665 a massive wave of metadimensional ener-
food imports. gy washed over human space. Spike drive craft in 

By 2600, spike drives were antiquated technology, metaspace were annihilated instantly, and in the blink 
found almost exclusively along the frontier of human of an eye, every psychic in human space immediate-
space where Jump Gates were too expensive and econ- ly suffered the consequences of catastrophic psychic 
omies too primitive to justify their use. burnout. The majority died instantly, with the handful 

that remained raving in the grip of incurable madness.
The Second Wave Later reconstruction placed the origin of this 
By then, the Second Wave of human colonization had “Scream” somewhere in the Veil Nebula, but no re-
reached its peak. The development of the Jump Gates cords exist of any successful investigation. Too much 
had allowed the Terran Mandate to project its mili- collapsed too quickly for any sort of exploratory expe-
tary strength far more easily, and the prohibitions on dition to be sent. Humanity was suddenly stripped of 
expansion had been loosened. By 2600, the frontier of every psychic resource. Without living mentors, new 
human space extended almost ten years of spike drive generations of psychics could not be trained without 
travel away from Terra. Even after taking Jump Gates recreating the entire laborious research corpus of the 
as far as possible, a fast pretech courier ship required a now-erased Psionic Authority. It would take genera-
year to reach the farthest colonial worlds. tions to mold functional mentors out of the untrained 

The Jump Gates allowed for massive numbers of mass of native psychics.
colonists to flee the stultifying bonds of stratified Ter- There was no time to recreate the necessary train-
ran society. Over four billion people left Terra over the ing. The Jump Gates were dead, and the core worlds of 
course of the Second Wave, most of them sent gladly human space collapsed with them. Countless colonies 
by governments that were more than willing to dispose that relied on the bulk produce of agricultural worlds 
of their more troublesome subjects. It wasn’t until late were left starving within months, their shipyards over-
in the Second Wave that the Terran Mandate began run by the desperate and ruined in the convulsive fight-
to realize that it simply didn’t have the manpower ing over the few remaining spike drive ships. There 
necessary to police the colonial worlds. Even with the was no possible way to feed a world of millions with 
overwhelming technological advantage of Terran fleets, the limited freight capacity of spike drive ships; only 
there were simply too many colonies and too many the Jump Gates and their massive slowboat freighters 
colonists to maintain direct control. could move such masses of cargo, and the slowboats 

The colonies realized this as well, starting around were too big to be retrofitted with spike drives… even 
2450. There was rarely an explicit rebellion against if they could cross the stars quickly enough to make a 
the Mandate; most often it was a disobedience of slow difference, which they could not.
decay, with tax shipments becoming intermittent and Echoes of the disaster rippled outward. The fron-
then absent, and Mandate orders obeyed first slowly tier regions were still too poor and primitive to afford 
and then not at all. The Mandate fleet struck a few of Jump Gates, so the worlds that remained on the edge 
the most valuable recalcitrants, but it was a rear-guard of human space were forced to supply their own pop-
action. The Terran Mandate had grown itself beyond ulation with food and other necessities. Some of these 
its ability to maintain control. worlds relied on small shipments of vital supplies from 

In the wild void of the frontier, spike drive arma- the core worlds. These luckless planets died when their 
das and petty stellar kingdoms formed to settle ancient motherworlds perished. Others were more self-reliant, 



The History of Space •125 

but few of these had the necessary resources to build for recreating the old pretech manufactories are still 
spike drive ships of their own. Those few worlds that long-lost, but these new academies are at least able to 
were able to construct the ships struggled as their psi- teach their students how to channel their powers in rel-
tech became useless and their shipments of vital core atively safe and useful ways. Some worlds guard these 
world components stopped. secrets jealously, but others make substantial profit out 

Human space had collapsed into a welter of isolat- of training foreign psychics sent by neighboring worlds. 
ed worlds. Interstellar travel fell to the handful of spike A few academies operate without any governmental 
drive ships that could be kept running on scavenged supervision at all, willingly teaching their secrets to 
components and half-derelict spaceyards. The Silence anyone with the money or a compatible ideology.
had begun. Stellar domains have begun to form around the 

most powerful worlds. Projecting more than a few tens 
The Silence Ends of thousands of troops to a neighboring world is far 
For almost six hundred years, humanity has been slow- beyond the abilities of most planets, so these domains 
ly recovering from the consequences of the Scream. tend to be loose confederacies of like-minded worlds, or 
Many frontier worlds have collapsed into barbarism else sparsely-populated colonies held under the ruthless 
and balkanized warfare. These “lost worlds” have suffi- control of a vastly larger and more powerful neighbor. 
cient resources for agriculture and life, but lack the fos- Most of these domains are held together by a glue of 
sil fuels or radioactives necessary to bootstrap modern ideology and trade benefits, and border skirmishes are 
technology. Some have even forgotten their origins or becoming more common between rival space empires.
have had them obscured in the haze of legend and myth. The alien neighbors of humanity have not been 

Other worlds have been more fortunate. These idle during the Silence. The Scream appears to have 
planets have been lucky enough to have the resources affected psychically-active races as badly as the humans 
necessary to sustain a rough and ready level of tech- were wounded, but those species that were not so vul-
nology. Their fusion plants are bulkier than the pre- nerable have expanded into human space at several 
tech that existed before the Scream, their spike drive points on the frontier. Some have even gone so far as 
engines are slower and more unstable, and the medical to seize human worlds for their own. In a few unfortu-
technology is working well if it can give the popula- nate regions of human space, entire sectors have been 
tion even a hundred years of good health before death conquered by alien powers.
claims them. Still, these worlds have managed to de- Now, in the year 3200, the fragile web of inter-
vise methods for doing without the esoteric disciplines stellar commerce and exploration has been reformed. 
of the psychic fabricators and are slowly ramping up Countless worlds remain locked in the darkness of 
their production of spike drive ships as their techniques the Silence, awaiting the bold merchants or reckless 
improve. This “postech” may be inferior, but after the explorers willing to return them to the embrace of in-
Silence it can be replicated in a way that pretech cannot. terstellar humanity. And if these brave souls should be 

A few worlds have even managed to rediscover rewarded with the ancient wealth in salvage and data 
the basic techniques of psychic mentorship. The fab- so long trapped on these worlds, who is to say that they 
ulously subtle and sophisticated disciplines necessary do not deserve it?



126• The History of Space

A Timeline of the Future

2108: The spike drive is discovered by crank scientist Dr. 2275: Researchers on several deep-space colonies begin 
Tiberius Crohn. Humanity moves almost over- to develop methods for controlling the advance 
night from a handful of science stations on the of MES, allowing its victims to use their abili-
solar system’s inner worlds to all-out interstellar ties without inflicting permanent brain damage 
exploration. Numerous Terran governments seek on themselves. The lives lost in this research are 
the resources of new worlds. never fully numbered, but Terran governments 

2110: Several scout craft are lost while learning the lim- rapidly move to control the research and training 
its of the spike drive. The dangers of excessive under the aegis of the “Psionic Authority”.
frequency climbing are recorded by survivors. 2280: Properly-trained MES carriers, known common-

2113: The first habitable extrasolar world is discovered ly as “psychics”,or more casually, as “Messes”, be-
by the scout ship Magellan. The ship’s patrons gin to use their abilities to assist governments and 
promptly claim the world for Greater Europe and private enterprise. Numerous fields begin to ben-
name it Renaissance. efit from the assistance of MES subjects, ranging 

2120: Pranashakti, the first life-bearing alien world, is from telepathic mental health providers to pre-
discovered by a Pan-Indian scout ship. The organ- cognitive industrial managers. The Psionic Au-
isms consist solely of plant analogues and some thority begins to experiment with more focused, 
primitive marine life, but a generation of xenobi- industrially-useful psionic disciplines. Again, the 
ologists finds work in analyzing it all. cost in lives is undisclosed.

2130: The development of asteroid mining technology 2315: The Psionic Authority perfects the first jump gate. 
provides vast amounts of raw materials to Earth’s A massive ring of psitech placed at the periphery 
orbital shipyards and factories. Ship prices plunge, of the solar system, the gate employs a choir of 
and numerous smaller organizations and states be- over fifty master teleporters to instantly translate 
come capable of stellar exploration. ships to a matching gate at Renaissance. Gate dis-

2150: The ruins of an advanced alien species are discov- persal is slowed by a lack of master teleporters, but 
ered on Typhon, an otherwise unremarkable gas eventually the transit time between Earth and the 
giant moon. Archaeologists date the ruins to ap- frontier is reduced to two days. The Earth nations 
proximately 40,000 BCE. Dubbed “the Watchers” lift the ban on further exploration now that their 
for the eye-like circular motifs on the ruins, few effective control is enhanced.
details are learned about the species. 2330: The Second Wave of human colonization begins. 

2200: The First Wave of human expansion reaches its Spike drive ships become all but unknown within 
peak. Most habitable planets within a year’s travel the core worlds as the jump gates allow cheaper 
time from Earth have been successfully colonized, system ships to travel between the older colonies.
many by small religious or ideological groups. 2350: Psitech-enhanced manufactory abilities and pre-
Terran nations begin to forbid further explora- cognitive surveyors vastly increase the rate of via-
tion for fear of being unable to maintain control ble colonization. Almost two billion humans leave 
over their offworld colonies over such distances. Earth for the wealth and freedom of the colony 
The Terran Mandate is organized by Earth’s su- worlds. The Terran Mandate begins to realize that 
perpowers in order to ensure that Terran control they now lack the manpower necessary to main-
of the colonies continues. tain control over so many colonies, even with the 

2240: “Metadimensional Extroversion Synd rome” be- reduced transit time.
gins to manifest in certain fifth-generation spacers. 2400: Obedience to Terran governments is now a polite 
Occurring most often around puberty, the abilities fiction on the frontier, in those cases when it is 
exhibited by MES victims seem flatly impossible acknowledged at all. The first stellar unions begin 
by normal scientific measure: telepathy, teleporta- to form. Some neighboring worlds resort to war, 
tion, precognitive flashes, and other abilities that but most colonists see no need for fighting with 
defy understanding. The syndrome is inevitably so many unexploited resources.
fatal unless the victim avoids all use of their un- 2425: The Terran Mandate has become deeply corrupt 
canny abilities. and hopelessly decadent. Its Directors concern 

2260: Some colony worlds begin to grow restive, and themselves exclusively with their own interests, 
there are incidents of skirmishing and piracy on rivalries, and ideological obsessions. Only the AI 
the frontier. Few disputes are over resources, but Maestros of Earth act as a check on their actions, 
ideological and religious conflicts become more as the Directors are unable to effectively control 
common. The Terran Mandate struggles to deal the Mandate without the help of their AI adjuncts. 
with the twelve-month message delay between These AIs struggle to maintain a basic level of pro-
Earth and the farthest colony worlds. bity among their creators.



The History of Space •127 

2450: The Second Wave is at its peak; it is the Gold- 2700: Countless core worlds die as they are cut off from 
en Age of Man. The Terran Mandate has largely vital food and technical supplies. Psitech manu-
given up on exerting control over the frontier col- factories are crippled, and only a relative handful 
onies, and now concentrates simply on neutraliz- of spike drive ships can be fabricated before the 
ing threats to the core worlds. Every description industrial base erodes. These ships band together 
of human civilization and ideology can be found for security while searching for resupply and be-
somewhere in human space, and cultures experi- come the progenitors of today’s Scavenger Fleets.
ment with new forms of social organization. Psi- 2705: Frontier worlds fare better than core planets. 
tech supplements normal technology to produce More spike drive ships are available, and those 
enormous abundance for even the poorest worlds worlds that have yet to receive Jump Gates were 
with access to core technology. still devoting effort to autonomous agriculture 

2460: Human gengineering becomes common on some and industry. Even so, the sudden loss of every 
worlds as societies attempt to improve their mem- human psychic leaves their psitech equipment and 
bers. Advances in longevity and health spread industries largely useless. Many frontier worlds 
widely, but attempts to significantly improve hu- devolve to survival-level subsistence.
man capabilities invariably bring serious draw- 2710: The last easily-salvaged remnants of Mandate pre-
backs from system strain and unanticipated side tech begin to wear out or become used up. The 
effects. Still, some of the more zealous cultures are most useful or effective tech was often explicitly 
willing to accept these consequences in pursuit of designed to be irreplaceable by frontier worlds in 
the “perfect human”. order to maintain the Mandate core’s monopoly 

2500: Jump Gates begin to reach the frontier. Major on the technology. With the core worlds dead or 
systems are the first to receive them, while most consumed by struggle, this technology can now 
of the minor worlds are still reliant on spike drive be found only in lost caches and Mandate ruins. 
ships. The furthest reaches of the frontier now Some worlds go to desperate extremes to maintain 
extend ten years of spike drive travel from Earth. vital pretech infrastructure, utilizing dangerous 
Population growth levels off and begins to decline methods or unstable repurposed tech.
with the increasing wealth of the colonies and 2900: Attempts are made to recover the techniques of 
their progressive self-absorption. psychic training. The complete absence of any ex-

2550: Certain remote sectors of space have begun to perienced psychic trainers hampers this effort, and 
embrace both gengineering and advanced AI the cost in psychic lives to recreate this training is 
integration to recreate humanity in ways more enormous. A few worlds are successful in devel-
suitable to local ambitions. Some of these sectors oping crude training programs, but most societies 
continue to interact with their baseline human abandon the effort in the face of more immediate 
neighbors, while other transhumans are danger- planetary needs.
ously aggressive in their proselytization. 3050: The Silence starts to lift. Those worlds that did 

2600: Spike drive ships are now somewhat antiquated, not experience a terminal collapse after the Scream 
serving a vastly reduced exploratory effort and as finally begin to perfect techniques of large-scale 
militia ships for the defense of local systems. Al- manufacturing that do not rely on psitech. Even 
most all core systems of importance are now linked the most sophisticated training programs can no 
with jump gates. Psitech has permeated even very longer replicate the narrow and esoteric talents of 
basic technology on these worlds. Large-scale war pre-Silence psychic fabricators.
between worlds is almost unknown. 3100: Spike drive ships begin the remapping of drill 

2665: The Scream erupts from somewhere within the courses between stars. With almost five centuries 
Veil Nebula. Reconstructions of the event suggest of neglect, the pre-Silence rutters have become 
that it was some form of faster-than-light psychic useless. The steady shifting of dimensional layers 
emanation, the wave propagating from one end of has rendered old course soundings dangerously 
human space to the other within seventeen min- inaccurate. All of the drill courses must be redis-
utes. The Scream inevitably rendered a psychic covered through trial and potentially fatal error. 
either dead or hopelessly insane. The Jump Gate Few Scavenger Fleets cooperate in sharing their 
network collapses. A period of stellar isolation and course data due to fears of competition.
chaos begins, now commonly called “the Silence”. 3150: Stellar unions start to form around the strongest 

2665: On Earth, the maddened arch-psions known as worlds. Exploration continues, often in the hands 
the Crazed annihilate the planet’s infrastructure, of small traders and scout crews who are willing 
destroy many AI Maestros, and pervert the High- to risk all for the chance to open a route to an un-
shine nanite recovery system. The solar system’s plundered tomb world. Warfare erupts between 
defense grid is activated and made universally unions contesting control over lost worlds and 
hostile to all starships. Earth vanishes from all space installations.
surviving records, its present condition unknown. 3200: The present day.






SECTOR CREATION
Every self-respecting sci-fi game needs to be able to 
provide a stock of interesting alien worlds. Even if a Sectors In Your Game
campaign should happen to take place largely on a sin- From a campaign perspective, sectors limit the scope 
gle world, the backdrop of foreign spheres adds context of material you need to take into account in your game. 
and additional adventure hooks to the game. While it’s perfectly possible to run a game with multi-

Most campaigns are going to involve substantial ple interconnected sectors, the sheer bulk of worlds can 
world-hopping, however, and the GM needs to be make that a painful prospect for most GMs. A single 
ready to deal with this. This chapter will give you the sector of 21-30 worlds is more than enough for most 
tools you need to fashion a sector of the void that will parties to explore.
be worth the reckless daring of a band of heroic PCs. Sectors and interstellar regions also provide you 

with a convenient explanation for running dramati-
The Nature of Sectors cally different campaigns. Players who want to run a 
In the former days of the Mandate, human space was space-operatic game set in a region of easy spaceflight 
generally divided into administrative sectors, each one and consistent high-tech marvels can do so, while a 
the particular responsibility of some fragment of the group that wants a harder sci-fi experience in a sector 
ancient Terran bureaucracy. By the end of the Second without psionic powers or exotic energy weapons can 
Wave, these responsibilities were almost entirely ficti- have their play as well. The vast sweep of human space 
tious, as the Mandate Fleet lacked the manpower nec- has room for your preferred tropes without having to 
essary to exert Old Earth’s will on its scattered progeny. fight the setting. No matter what you want to play, 
Even so, the centuries-old grind of bureaucratic pro- there’s some chunk of human space that has it.
cedure still dutifully labeled each fragment of distant A sector provides the basic background for the ad-
space with its own identity. ventures the PCs encounter, as every world needs to 

Sectors were established on the basis of metadi- have some kind of adventure-worthy content if it’s to 
mensional proximity rather than simple spatial pro- justify its drain on a GM’s creativity and focus. Creat-
pinquity. Individual stars in a sector might be spread ing worlds purely for pleasure or aesthetic satisfaction 
out over dozens of light years, but the metadimensional is entirely valid, but as a working GM, you also need 
currents between them were strong enough to allow material you can play. This chapter will show you how 
quick travel among them, when a physically-neighbor- to maximize the return on your effort, and get the most 
ing star might require impossibly lengthy drills through playable content out of the least amount of work.
metadimensional space to reach it. This is a necessity in any system, but it is especial-

Settlers in these far sectors often adopted Mandate ly important if you’re going to be running a sandbox 
sector nomenclature simply out of convenience. The game. A GM who tries to flesh out every nook and 
sectors that Fleet scout ships and far trader adventurers cranny of the dozens of worlds they create will be rap-
mapped out were composed of stars “close” enough to idly exhausted by the effort, and might still lack the 
allow for trade with their ramshackle spike drives and content they need to actually run a game during the 
colonial cargo haulers, and their density allowed for next session of play. A GM needs to have a plan and 
trade and assistance between nearby friendly worlds. an appropriate set of tools if they are to deal with the 
Those with a more isolationist bent sought out sectors challenge in a comfortable, straightforward way.
with far-scattered stars that couldn’t be bridged by the When building a sector, you can generally assume 
less sophisticated drives that most colonists used. that it’s isolated from any neighboring regions. There 

Most sectors had limited contact with other re- might be a few connections along the “borders” of the 
gions of space. While “bordering” stars could some- sector, still-remembered spike drive paths into the next 
times allow drills into a neighboring sector, large collection of worlds, but you’ve got enough to build if 
patches of unfriendly metadimensional space often you just focus on a single sector at a time.
strictly limited the available paths into or out of a sector. You are advised to carefully read the following 
Some sectors were entirely inaccessible by anything but pages and take heed of the advice on how much con-
top-grade Mandate spike drives capable of leaping the tent you should create for each world. A GM would 
broad gaps around them, and some entire regions were not be a GM if they did not take pleasure in creating 
isolated by a few narrow bridgepoints into the cluster. wondrous new worlds to explore, but the most enthu-

As a consequence, modern human space varies siastic demiurge still has a limited amount of creative 
wildly in every respect. Some regions have sophisticat- energy, time, and focus to spend on a campaign. If you 
ed interstellar trade and wide-reaching empires, while follow the steps in the following pages, you’ll be able to 
others are struggling to rise from primitive barbarism. ensure a playable amount of gaming content for your 
A lost bridgepoint can separate whole empires, leaving next session before you start spending your effort on 
both entirely ignorant of each other… for the moment. more decorative elements of your creation.



130• Sector Creation

Creating a Stellar Sector

Once you’ve decided to forge your own piece of the Once you’ve placed the randomly-positioned 
infinite void, you’ll want to grab a sheet of large-hex stars, add the remainder to connect any stellar clumps 
hex paper from one of the many templates available on- or groupings. Remember that standard postech spike 
line. First you’ll make a stellar map of the sector on this drives can’t reach more than 3 hexes, so any cluster that 
sheet, and then you’ll individually flesh out the worlds can’t be reached with such a drill will be inaccessible to 
to whatever degree of fineness your needs require. anything but pretech-grade drives.

One crucial thing to remember at this stage of The stellar map you’ve just created is an abstrac-
creation is that you do not have to create everything. You tion, one reflecting the eddies and currents of meta-
don’t need to answer every question about the sector or dimensional space. The individual stars might look 
have every world in adventure-ready condition. Right adjacent on the map, but some may be vast distances 
now you’re just laying down broad strokes and rough apart. If you’d prefer to use more realistic star maps, 
colors to the sector, and when it comes time to do detail you can grab some three-dimensional star map off the 
work you’ll save it for the worlds that matter most to web and convert a convenient number of light years 
your immediate needs. into a single “hex” of distance for spike drive purposes.

Every GM has a limited supply of time, energy, 
and creative inspiration. If you try to fabricate an en- Lay Down the Primary Worlds
tire complete sector in one go, with interesting planets With the stars placed, it’s time to place the primary 
and meaningful interstellar intrigue and easy adventure inhabited worlds. While it’s possible to declare that 
hooks all over the place, you’re likely to exhaust your- a star is orbited only by barren rocks, such stars are 
self before you even get to play. more difficult to make useful as places of adventure 

Instead, you should follow a simple guiding prin- and gameable fun.
ciple whenever building anything for your campaign, Right now, assume that each inhabited system has 
whether a stellar sector or an adventure outline. a single primary world. The original colonists would 

Am I having fun? If you’re enjoying yourself, then have naturally sought out the best, most habitable 
you can keep building. We follow this hobby because world for their founding. As a consequence, however 
it’s fun, and if you’re enjoying the process then you nasty the primary world is, the others in the system 
should let yourself have your indulgence. are probably even worse. If you wish to add additional 

Am I going to need this for the next session? If what planets to the system later, you can do so, but for now 
you’re creating is something you know you’re going to you’ll want to focus on just one.
need for the next game session, then you should finish Start by rolling two world tags for each planet. 
it. Don’t let this feeling of obligation extend to every World tags are simple tropes that reflect the most im-
detail, however; it can be easy to imagine situations portant qualities about the world, or at least those qual-
where you’ll need to elaborate some NPC or organiza- ities most important to adventurers. A list of a hundred 
tion or location, but if you respond to every such pos- potential world tags starts on page 132.
sibility you’ll never get away from the drawing board. It’s most convenient to roll world tags for each 

If you’re not having fun and you don’t need it for planet before moving on to the other elements of the 
your next game session, stop it. You’re going to exhaust world, so you spend less time flipping back and forth 
yourself on minutiae and trivia and not have the energy between the sections. Don’t worry about making the 
to do the parts you really do need, or the vigor needed tags make sense yet. Just note them down and go on.
to actually run this for the group. Next, roll the atmospheres for each world. In this 

With that principle kept firmly in mind, it’s time and the following steps, you can either reroll results 
to start building the sector. that make no sense in light of the world tags you’ve 

generated, or simply pick a result that fits. If you’re 
Place the Stars feeling more adventurous, however, you can try to 
The standard sector map is a grid of hexagons 8 wide by think of an explanation that reconciles seemingly in-
10 high, with hex templates easily acquired from the net. commensurate results.
Roll 1d10 and add 20 to determine the total number of After you roll atmospheres for each planet, repeat 
stars in the sector, or simply choose a number that suits. the process for temperature, biosphere, population, 

For the first twenty or so stars, roll 1d8 and 1d10 and tech level. Optionally, you can go on to add addi-
together to determine the column and row in which tional planets or points of interest to each system.
to place the star. If the hex is already occupied, place it Finally, tack on a name for the planet and give it a 
adjacent in the direction of the nearest edge. sentence worth of description. You don’t need to flesh 

Some columns have “half-hexes” in them, and only it out fully right now. Just note down whatever rough 
9 full hexes; if you roll a 10 for such a column, either idea of it comes to mind from its world tags, population, 
reroll or place it at the bottom-most full hex. and other planetary qualities.



Sector Creation •131 

Mark Polities and Trade Routes Next, use the world tags to create adventure com-
Identify the star systems that are in contact with each ponents. Each tag includes different example Enemies, 
other and draw lines of communication between them. Friends, Complications, Things, and Places. Take an 
Remember that any gap of 4 or more hexes can’t be Enemy from both world tags or create one for each, and 
crossed without pretech spike drives, so any contact merge them together into a single antagonist. Thus, a 
between distant clusters will have to be through an Feral World with Heavy Industry might have a cannibal 
intermediate world. oligarch who literally lives on the flesh and blood of his 

Worlds in contact with each other may not neces- slave laborers. Give this Enemy a name and a sentence 
sarily be friendly, but they do know about each other of description.
and have at least a basic understanding of local con- Repeat the process for a Friend, a Complication, 
ditions. Some provision is usually made for foreign a Thing, and a Place. You don’t necessarily need to use 
visitors from these other worlds, even if it’s nothing both tags in every instance, and you’ll likely want to 
more than a strictly-monitored starport housing unit. make up your own components inspired by the tags, 

If two or more planets seem like they ought to but you should have at least one item in each category 
belong to the same interstellar polity, sketch out a “bor- written down on the planetary record. You’ll use these 
der” around the grouping. Most TL4 worlds would be raw elements later to create a starting adventure for 
very hard-pressed to mount an effective interstellar your band of star-faring freebooters.
invasion of a peer world, so these polities have likely Lastly, take a few minutes to answer some critical 
formed out of diplomatic or cultural ties, or consist of questions about the planet, noting the answers down 
a local hegemon exerting its rule over planets too weak in the cultural section of the sheet.
or primitive to resist their influence. What does this world have that the PCs might care 

Many sectors will have no multi-system govern- about? Does it export a valuable and portable commod-
ments of any kind. The individual worlds might be too ity, or provide a special tech, or have unique job oppor-
independent, or the recovery of spaceflight technology tunities for expendable offworlder adventurers?
may have been too recent to allow for ties of mutual What is the biggest conflict on the world right 
governance to form yet. Such disjointed sectors can now? Is it a social struggle between classes, tension 
make life easier for the typical band of PCs, as escape with offworlder merchants or visitors, a war going on 
into a new system means escape from the legal jurisdic- among local governments, or some other big crisis? 
tion of a world they may have recently offended. Every world should have at least one obvious conflict 

that the PCs might choose to engage or be pulled into.
Build Out the Important Worlds What do they think about outsiders? Are they 
Most of the worlds in your sector don’t need anything comfortable with offworlders, do they view them with 
more than what you’ve already given them. A few unusual mistrust, or are they outright xenophobic?
worlds need more elaborate detail, however, and for What is law enforcement like? Are there special 
these you’ll want to make use of a separate planetary laws that might tangle the PCs? If the PCs break a law, 
record sheet for the world. what kind of enforcement can they expect?

Only detail worlds that you’re going to need for Where do the PCs land? What’s the name of the 
the next session. In this case, that means you should major starport on the world, and does the starport have 
detail the world that the campaign starts on and those any special deficiencies or unique opportunities?
worlds that the PCs might end up traveling to at the You can flesh out a world beyond these questions 
end of the first session. For most purposes, this just if you wish, but they provide a bare minimum of data.
means the starting world and its immediate neighbors.

First, pick a rough cultural template for the world. Choose Factions and Relations
Maybe it has a Latin American flavor, or was founded Lastly, look at what you’ve created and determine 
by Russian colonists, or was an outpost of Byzantine the relationships between the starting world and its 
Empire enthusiasts. This culture has doubtless changed neighbors. Also, decide on the relationships between 
drastically since its initial founding, but it gives you a any polities you’ve established. Open interstellar war-
baseline for assigning names to people and places, iden- fare is very hard for a lone TL4 world to sustain, but 
tifying the common language spoken on the planet, and a powerful planet or combine might be able to do it. 
giving you enough information to describe local foods, More likely are cold wars of spies and saboteurs.
architectural styles, and small slice-of-life elements. You may decide to establish one or more Factions 

You can always take the time to create an entirely to help give some independent motion to the sector’s 
new hybrid culture, but whatever you make or choose background. Two or three Factions are plenty for the 
should be clear enough in your mind to let you give start of a campaign, and you should feel free to make 
quick answers to sudden questions about cultural val- new ones or let old ones fall inactive as the game pro-
ues or local habits. Again, it’s not critical to worry about gresses. Rules for Factions start on page 210.
historical accuracy; these worlds have had centuries to And with that, your sector is ready for play. The 
form their own worldviews and local customs. Adventure Creation chapter gives the next step.



132• World Tags

Assigning World Tags

The first step in world creation, and perhaps the most Each tag includes associated entries for Enemies, 
important, lies in assigning “tags” to the world. Tags Friends, Complications, Things, and Places that fit with 
are brief conceptual tropes that set the world off from that tag. GMs can combine the elements of the two 
planets of otherwise similar population and character- tags to create ones flavored specifically for that world. 
istics. You can either pick from the tag table to select For example, two random tags for a world might be 
qualities that sound interesting for a world, or else roll “Regional Hegemon” and “Psionics Fear”. Combining 
percentile dice to select them randomly. the “Colonial Official” and “Mental Purity Investiga-

In general, you should pick or roll two tags for tor” entries from the enemies lists of those tags, we 
any given world. Using a single tag can leave a plan- come up with Heinrich Stalt, Imperial Mind Proctor, 
et feeling somewhat flat and one-dimensional, while a grim inquisitor dispatched to the worlds under Im-
using three or more can end up muddying the feel of perial “protection” to purge them of the awful curse of 
the world. The goal of the tags is not to automatical- psionically-active monsters.
ly combine into some intricately sophisticated world These NPCs, objects, places, and situations can 
model, but to provide some clear, bright elements to be used as raw grist for generating your adventures or 
relate to the PCs. Tags can randomly give you “desert be slotted into the scenario seeds provided later in the 
planet torn by civil war”, from which you can then cre- Adventure Generation chapter. Of course, not every 
ate “an arid world riven by factional disputes between Enemy will be intrinsically hostile to the PCs, nor every 
fragmented clans, the families based around ownership Friend necessarily a sympathetic figure.
of irreplaceable pre-Scream moisture collectors”. Naturally, you should feel free to come up with 

Tags are meant to simplify your life as a GM. They your own tags as well. Almost any science-fiction trope 
provide quick, simple hooks for adventure and cultural that you enjoy can be turned into a tag, and charac-
characterization to help distinguish the myriad worlds teristic elements can be blended into the list of raw 
of your campaign from each other. adventure components.

d100 Tag d100 Tag d100 Tag d100 Tag

1 Abandoned Colony 26 Flying Cities 51 Misandry/Misogyny 76 Rigid Culture

2 Alien Ruins 27 Forbidden Tech 52 Night World 77 Rising Hegemon

3 Altered Humanity 28 Former Warriors 53 Nomads 78 Ritual Combat

4 Anarchists 29 Freak Geology 54 Oceanic World 79 Robots

5 Anthropomorphs 30 Freak Weather 55 Out of Contact 80 Seagoing Cities

6 Area 51 31 Friendly Foe 56 Outpost World 81 Sealed Menace

7 Badlands World 32 Gold Rush 57 Perimeter Agency 82 Secret Masters

8 Battleground 33 Great Work 58 Pilgrimage Site 83 Sectarians

9 Beastmasters 34 Hatred 59 Pleasure World 84 Seismic Instability

10 Bubble Cities 35 Heavy Industry 60 Police State 85 Shackled World

11 Cheap Life 36 Heavy Mining 61 Post-Scarcity 86 Societal Despair

12 Civil War 37 Hivemind 62 Preceptor Archive 87 Sole Supplier

13 Cold War 38 Holy War 63 Pretech Cultists 88 Taboo Treasure

14 Colonized Population 39 Hostile Biosphere 64 Primitive Aliens 89 Terraform Failure

15 Cultural Power 40 Hostile Space 65 Prison Planet 90 Theocracy

16 Cybercommunists 41 Immortals 66 Psionics Academy 91 Tomb World

17 Cyborgs 42 Local Specialty 67 Psionics Fear 92 Trade Hub

18 Cyclical Doom 43 Local Tech 68 Psionics Worship 93 Tyranny

19 Desert World 44 Major Spaceyard 69 Quarantined World 94 Unbraked AI

20 Doomed World 45 Mandarinate 70 Radioactive World 95 Urbanized Surface

21 Dying Race 46 Mandate Base 71 Refugees 96 Utopia

22 Eugenic Cult 47 Maneaters 72 Regional Hegemon 97 Warlords

23 Exchange Consulate 48 Megacorps 73 Restrictive Laws 98 Xenophiles

24 Fallen Hegemon 49 Mercenaries 74 Revanchists 99 Xenophobes

25 Feral World 50 Minimal Contact 75 Revolutionaries 00 Zombies



World Tags •133 

Abandoned Colony Alien Ruins

The world once hosted a colony, whether human or The world has significant alien ruins present. The 
otherwise, until some crisis or natural disaster drove locals may or may not permit others to investigate 
the inhabitants away or killed them off. The colony the ruins, and may make it difficult to remove any 
might have been mercantile in nature, an expedition objects of value without substantial payment. Any 
to extract valuable local resources, or it might have surviving ruins with worthwhile salvage almost cer-
been a reclusive cabal of zealots. The remains of the tainly have some defense or hazard to explain their 
colony are usually in ruins, and might still be dan- unplundered state.
gerous from the aftermath of whatever destroyed it 
in the first place. E Customs inspector, Worshipper of the ruins, 

Hidden alien survivor
E Crazed survivors, Ruthless plunderers of the 

F Curious scholar, Avaricious local resident, In-
ruins, Automated defense system terstellar smuggler

F Inquisitive stellar archaeologist, Heir to the col-
C Traps in the ruins, Remote location, Paranoid 

ony’s property, Local wanting the place cleaned customs officials
out and made safe

T Precious alien artifacts, Objects left with the 
C The local government wants the ruins to remain remains of a prior unsuccessful expedition, Un-

a secret, The locals claim ownership of it, The translated alien texts, Untouched hidden ruins
colony is crumbling and dangerous to navigate

P Undersea ruin, Orbital ruin, Perfectly preserved 
T Long-lost property deeds, Relic stolen by the alien building, Alien mausoleum

colonists when they left, Historical record of 
the colonization attempt

P Decaying habitation block, Vine-covered town 
square, Structure buried by an ancient landslide

Altered Humanity Anarchists

The humans on this world are visibly and drastical- Rather than being an incidental anarchy of struggling 
ly different from normal humanity. They may have tribes and warring factions, this world actually has a 
additional limbs, new sensory organs, or other sig- functional society with no centralized authority. Au-
nificant changes. Were these from ancestral eugenic thority might be hyper-localized to extended families, 
manipulation, strange stellar mutations, or from an specific religious parishes, or voluntary associations. 
environmental toxin unique to this world? Some force is preventing an outside group or internal 

malcontents from coalescing into a power capable of 
E Biochauvinist local, Local experimenter, Men- imposing its rule on the locals; this force might be an 

tally unstable mutant ancient pretech defense system, a benevolent military 
F Local seeking a “cure”, Curious xenophiliac, An- AI, or the sheer obscurity and isolation of the culture.

thropological researcher
E Offworlder imperialist, Reformer seeking to 

C Alteration is contagious, Alteration is necessary 
impose “good government”, Exploiter taking 

for long-term survival, Locals fear and mistrust 
advantage of the lack of centralized resistance

non-local humans
F Proud missionary for anarchy, Casual local free 

T Original pretech mutagenic equipment, Valu-
spirit, Curious offworlder political scientist

able biological byproduct from the mutants, 
“Cure” for the altered genes, Record of the orig- C The anarchistic structure is compelled by an 
inal colonial genotypes external power, The anarchy is enabled by cur-

rently abundant resources, The protecting force 
P Abandoned eugenics laboratory, An environ-

that shelters the anarchy is waning
ment requiring the mutation for survival, A 
sacred site where the first local was transformed T A macguffin that would let the possessor enforce 

their rule on others, A vital resource needed to 
preserve general liberty, Tech forbidden as dis-
ruptive to the social order

P Community of similar-sized homes, Isolated 
clan homestead, Automated mining site



134• World Tags

Anthropomorphs Area 51

The locals were originally human, but at some point The world’s government is fully aware of their local 
became anthropomorphic, either as an ancient furry stellar neighbors, but the common populace has no 
colony, a group of animal-worshiping sectarians, or idea about it- and the government means to keep 
gengineers who just happened to find animal ele- it that way. Trade with government officials in re-
ments most convenient for surviving on the world. mote locations is possible, but any attempt to clue the 
Depending on the skill of the original gengineers, commoners in on the truth will be met with lethal 
their feral forms may or may not work as well as their reprisals.
original human bodies, or may come with drawbacks 
inherited from their animal elements. E Suspicious government minder, Free merchant 

who likes his local monopoly, Local who wants 
E Anthro-supremacist local, Native driven by feral a specimen for dissection

urges, Outside exploiter who sees the locals as 
F Crusading offworld investigator, Conspira-

subhuman creatures cy-theorist local, Idealistic government reformer
F Fascinated genetic researcher, Diplomat trained 

C The government has a good reason to keep the 
to deal with normals, Local needing outside help truth concealed, The government ruthlessly op-

C The locals consider their shapes a curse from presses the natives, The government is actually 
their foolish ancestors, Society is ordered ac- composed of offworlders
cording to animal forms, The locals view normal 

T Elaborate spy devices, Memory erasure tech, 
humans as repulsive or inferior Possessions of the last offworlder who decided 

T Pretech gengineering tech, A “cure” that may not to spread the truth
be wanted, Sacred feral totem

P Desert airfield, Deep subterranean bunker, Hid-
P Shrine to a feral deity, Nature preserve suited to den mountain valley

an animal type, Living site built to take advan-
tage of animal traits



World Tags •135 

Badlands World Battleground

Whatever the original climate and atmosphere type, The world is a battleground for two or more outside 
something horrible happened to this world. Bio- powers. They may be interstellar rivals, or groups 
logical, chemical, or nanotechnical weaponry has operating out of orbitals or other system bodies. 
reduced it to a wretched hellscape. Some local life Something about the planet is valuable enough for 
might still be able to survive on its blasted surface, them to fight over, but the natives are too weak to be 
usually at some dire cost in health or humanity. anything but animate obstacles to the fight.

E Mutated badlands fauna, Desperate local, Bad- E Ruthless military commander, Looter pack 
lands raider chief chieftain, Traitorous collaborator

F Native desperately wishing to escape the world, F Native desperately seeking protection, Pragmat-
Scientist researching ecological repair methods, ic military officer, Hapless war orphan
Ruin scavenger

C The war just ended as both sides are leaving, The 
C Radioactivity, Bioweapon traces, Broken terrain, natives somehow brought this on themselves, A 

Sudden local plague small group of natives profit tremendously from 
the fighting

T Maltech research core, Functional pretech 
weaponry, An uncontaminated well T A cache of the resource the invaders seek, Aban-

P Untouched oasis, Ruined city, Salt flat doned prototype military gear, Precious spy in-
telligence lost by someone

P Artillery-pocked wasteland, Reeking refugee 
camp, Burnt-out shell of a city

Beastmasters Bubble Cities

The natives have extremely close bonds with the local Whether due to a lack of atmosphere or an uninhab-
fauna, possibly having special means of communica- itable climate, the world’s cities exist within domes or 
tion and control through tech or gengineering. Local pressurized buildings. In such sealed environments, 
animal life plays a major role in their society, indus- techniques of surveillance and control can grow ba-
try, or warfare, and new kinds of beasts may be bred roque and extreme.
to suit their purposes.

E Native dreading outsider contamination, Sab-
E Half-feral warlord of a beast swarm, Coldly in- oteur from another bubble city, Local official 

human scientist, Altered beast with human in- hostile to outsider ignorance of laws
tellect and furious malice

F Local rebel against the city officials, Mainte-
F Native bonded with an adorable animal, Herder nance chief in need of help, Surveyor seeking 

of very useful beasts, Animal-revering mystic new building sites
C The “animals” are very heavily gengineered hu- C Bubble rupture, Failing atmosphere reproces-

mans, The animals actually run the society, The sor, Native revolt against officials, All-seeing 
animals have the same rights as humans surveillance cameras

T Tech used to alter animal life, A plague vial that T Pretech habitat technology, Valuable industrial 
could wipe out the animals, A pretech device products, Master key codes to a city’s security 
that can perform a wonder if operated by a beast system

P Park designed as a comfortable home for beasts, P City power core, Surface of the bubble, Hydro-
Public plaza designed to accommodate animal ponics complex, Warren-like hab block
companions, Factory full of animal workers



136• World Tags

Cheap Life Civil War

Human life is near-worthless on this world. Ubiqui- The world is currently torn between at least two op-
tous cloning, local conditions that ensure early death, posing factions, all of which claim legitimacy. The 
a culture that reveres murder, or a social structure war may be the result of a successful rebel uprising 
that utterly discounts the value of most human lives against tyranny, or it might just be the result of 
ensures that death is the likely outcome for any ac- schemers who plan to be the new masters once the 
tion that irritates someone consequential. revolution is complete.

E Master assassin, Bloody-handed judge, Overseer E Faction commissar, Angry native, Conspiracy 
of disposable clones theorist who blames offworlders for the war, 

F Endearing local whose life the PCs accidental- Deserter looking out for himself, Guerrilla ban-
ly bought, Escapee from death seeking outside dit chieftain
help, Reformer trying to change local mores F Faction loyalist seeking aid, Native caught in 

C Radiation or local diseases ensure all locals die the crossfire, Offworlder seeking passage off 
before twenty-five years of age, Tech ensures the planet
that death is just an annoyance, Locals are totally C The front rolls over the group, Famine strikes, 
convinced of a blissful afterlife Bandit infestations are in the way

T Device that revives or re-embodies the dead, T Ammo dump, Military cache, Treasure buried 
Maltech engine fueled by human life, Priceless for after the war, Secret war plans
treasure held by a now-dead owner

P Battle front, Bombed-out town, Rear-area red 
P Thronging execution ground, extremely curso- light zone, Propaganda broadcast tower

ry cemetery, Factory full of lethal dangers that 
could be corrected easily

Cold War Colonized Population

Two or more great powers control the planet, and A neighboring world has successfully colonized this 
they have a hostility to each other that’s just barely less-advanced or less-organized planet, and the na-
less than open warfare. The hostility might be ideo- tives aren’t happy about it. A puppet government 
logical in nature, or it might revolve around control may exist, but all real decisions are made by the local 
of some local resource. viceroy.

E Suspicious chief of intelligence, Native who E Suspicious security personnel, Offworlder-hat-
thinks the outworlders are with the other side, ing natives, Local crime boss preying on rich 
Femme fatale offworlders

F Apolitical information broker, Spy for the other F Native resistance leader, Colonial official seek-
side, Unjustly accused innocent, “He’s a bastard, ing help, Native caught between the two sides
but he’s our bastard” official

C Natives won’t talk to offworlders, Colonial re-
C Police sweep, Low-level skirmishing, “Red scare” pression, Misunderstood local customs
T List of traitors in government, secret military T Relic of the resistance movement, List of collab-

plans, Huge cache of weapons built up in prepa- orators, Precious substance extracted by colonial 
ration for war labor

P Seedy bar in a neutral area, Political rally, Isolat- P Deep wilderness resistance camp, City district 
ed area where fighting is underway off-limits to natives, Colonial labor site



World Tags •137 

Cultural Power Cybercommunists

The world is a considerable cultural power in the On this world communism actually works, thanks 
sector, producing music, art, philosophy, or some to pretech computing devices and greater or lesser 
similar intangible that their neighbors find irresist- amounts of psychic precognition. Central planning 
ibly attractive. Other worlds might have a profound nodes direct all production and employment on the 
degree of cultural cachet as the inheritor of some world. Citizens in good standing have access to ample 
venerable artistic tradition. amounts of material goods for all needs and many 

wants. Instead of strife over wealth, conflicts erupt 
E Murderously eccentric artist, Crazed fan, Failed over political controls, cultural precepts, or control 

artist with an obsessive grudge, Critic with a over the planning nodes. Many cybercommunist 
crusade to enact worlds show a considerable bias toward the private 

F Struggling young artist, Pupil of the artistic tra- interests of those who run the planning nodes.
dition, Scholar of the art, Offworlder hating the 
source of corrupting alien ways E Embittered rebel against perceived unfairness, 

Offworlder saboteur, Aspiring Stalin-figure
C The art is slowly lethal to its masters, The art 

is mentally or physically addictive, The art is a F Idealistic planning node tech, Cynical anti-cor-
fragment of ancient technical or military science ruption cop, Precognitive economist

C The pretech planning computers are breaking 
T The instrument of a legendary master, The only 

copy of a dead master’s opus, Proof of intellectu- down, The planning only works because the 
al property ownership locals have been mentally or physically altered, 

The planning computers can’t handle the in-
P Recording or performance studio, Public festi-

creasing population within the system
val choked with tourists, Monument to a dead 
master of the art T Planning node computer, Wildly destabilizing 

commodity that can’t be factored into plans, A 
tremendous store of valuables made by accident

P Humming factory, Apartment block of perfectly 
equal flats, Mass demonstration of unity

Cyborgs Cyclical Doom

The planet’s population makes heavy use of cyber- The world regularly suffers some apocalyptic ca-
netics, with many of the inhabitants possessing at tastrophe that wipes out organized civilization on it. 
least a cosmetic amount of chrome. This may be the The local culture is aware of this cycle and has tra-
result of a strong local cyber tech base, a religious ditions to ensure a fragment of civilization survives 
injunction, or simply a necessary measure to survive into the next era, but these traditions don’t always 
the local conditions. work properly, and sometimes dangerous fragments 

of the past emerge.
E Ambitious hacker of cyber implants, Cybertech 

oligarch, Researcher craving fresh offworlders, E Offworlder seeking to trigger the apocalypse 
Cybered-up gang boss early for profit, Local recklessly taking advan-

tage of preparation stores, Demagogue claiming 
F Charity-working implant physician, Idealistic 

young cyber researcher, Avant-garde activist the cycle is merely a myth of the authorities
F Harried official working to prepare, Offworlder 

C The powerful and dangerous come here often 
for cutting-edge implants, The cyber has some studying the cycles, Local threatened by perils of 
universal negative side-effect, Cyber and those the cycle’s initial stages
implanted with it are forbidden to leave the C The cycles really are a myth of the authorities, 
planet as a tech security measure The cycles are controlled by alien constructs, An 

outside power is interfering with preparation
T Unique prototype cyber implant, Secret research 

files, A virus that debilitates cyborgs, A cache of T A lost cache of ancient treasures, Tech or ar-
critically-needed therapeutic cyber chives that will pinpoint the cycle’s timing, Key-

codes to bypass an ancient vault’s security
P Grimy slum chop-shop, Bloody lair of implant 

rippers, Stark plaza where everyone is seeing P Lethally-defended vault of forgotten secrets, 
things through their augmented-reality cyber Starport crowded with panicked refugees, Town 

existing in the shadow of some monstrous mon-
ument to a former upheaval



138• World Tags

Desert World Doomed World

The world may have a breathable atmosphere and a The world is doomed, and the locals may or may not 
human-tolerable temperature range, but it is an arid, know it. Some cosmic catastrophe looms before them, 
stony waste outside of a few places made habitable and the locals have no realistic way to get everyone to 
by human effort. The deep wastes are largely unex- safety. To the extent that the public is aware, society 
plored and inhabited by outcasts and worse. is disintegrating into a combination of religious fer-

vor, abject hedonism, and savage violence.
E Raider chieftain, Crazed hermit, Angry isola-

tionists, Paranoid mineral prospector, Strange E Crazed prophet of a false salvation, Ruthless 
desert beast leader seeking to flee with their treasures, Cyn-

ical ship captain selling a one-way trip into hard 
F Native guide, Research biologist, Aspiring ter-

raformer vacuum as escape to another world
F Appealing waif or family head seeking escape, 

C Sandstorms, Water supply failure, Native war-
fare over water rights Offworld relief coordinator, Harried law officer

C The doom is false or won’t actually kill everyone, 
T Enormous water reservoir, Map of hidden wells, 

Pretech rainmaking equipment The doom was intentionally triggered by some-
one, Mass escape is possible if warring groups 

P Oasis, “The Empty Quarter” of the desert, Hid-
can somehow be brought to cooperate

den underground cistern
T Clearance for a ship to leave the planet, A cache 

of priceless cultural artifacts, The life savings of 
someone trying to buy passage out, Data that 
would prove to the public the end is nigh

P Open square beneath a sky angry with a fore-
taste of th impending ruin, Orgiastic celebration 
involving sex and murder in equal parts, Holy 
site full of desperate petitioners to the divine

Dying Race Eugenic Cult

The inhabitants of this world are dying out, and they Even in the days before the Silence, major improve-
know it. Through environmental toxins, hostile ment of the human genome always seemed to come 
bio-weapons, or sheer societal despair, the culture with unacceptable side-effects. Some worlds host 
cannot replenish its numbers. Members seek mean- secret cults that perpetuate these improvements 
ing in their own strange goals or peculiar faiths, regardless of the cost, and a few planets have been 
though a few might struggle to find some way to taken over entirely by the cults.
reverse their slow yet inevitable doom.

E Eugenic superiority fanatic, Mentally unstable 
E Hostile outsider who wants the locals dead, Off- homo superior, Mad eugenic scientist

worlder seeking to take advantage of their weak-
F Eugenic propagandist, Biotechnical investigator, 

ened state, Invaders eager to push the locals out Local seeking revenge on cult
of their former lands

C The altered cultists look human, The locals are 
F One of the few youth among the population, terrified of any unusual physical appearance, 

Determined and hopeful reformer, Researcher The genetic modifications- and drawbacks- are 
seeking a new method of reproduction contagious with long exposure

C The dying culture’s values were monstrous, The 
T Serum that induces the alteration, Elixir that 

race’s death is somehow necessary to prevent reverses the alteration, Pretech biotechnical da-
some grand catastrophe, The race is somehow tabanks, List of secret cult sympathizers
convinced they deserve this fate

P Eugenic breeding pit, Isolated settlement of 
T Extremely valuable reproductive tech, Trea- altered humans, Public place infiltrated by cult 

sured artifacts of the former age, Bioweapon sympathizers
used on the race

P City streets devoid of pedestrians, Mighty edifice 
now crumbling with disrepair, Small dwelling 
full of people in a town now otherwise empty



World Tags •139 

Exchange Consulate Fallen Hegemon

The Exchange of Light once served as the largest, At some point in the past, this world was a hegemon-
most trusted banking and diplomatic service in hu- ic power over some or all of the sector, thanks to su-
man space. Even after the Silence, some worlds retain perior tech, expert diplomacy, the weakness of their 
a functioning Exchange Consulate where banking neighbors, or inherited Mandate legitimacy. Some 
services and arbitration can be arranged. kind of crash or revolt broke their power, however, 

and now the world is littered with the wreckage of 
E Corrupt Exchange official, Indebted native former glory.

who thinks the players are Exchange agents, 
Exchange official dunning the players for debts E Bitter pretender to a meaningless throne, Re-
incurred sentful official dreaming of empire, Vengeful 

offworlder seeking to punish their old rulers
F Consul in need of offworld help, Local banker 

seeking to hurt his competition, Exchange dip- F Realistic local leader trying to hold things to-
lomat gether, Scholar of past glories, Refugee from an 

overthrown colonial enclave
C The local Consulate has been corrupted, the 

Consulate is cut off from its funds, A powerful C The hegemon’s rule was enlightened and fair, It 
debtor refuses to pay collapsed due to its own internal strife rather 

than external resistance, It pretends that nothing 
T Exchange vault codes, Wealth hidden to con-

ceal it from a bankruptcy judgment, Location has happened to its power, It’s been counter-col-
of forgotten vault onized by vengeful outsiders

T Precious insignia of former rule, Relic tech im-
P Consulate meeting chamber, Meeting site be-

tween fractious disputants, Exchange vault portant to its power, Plundered colonial artifact
P Palace far too grand for its current occupant, 

Oversized spaceport now in disrepair, Boule-
vard lined with monuments to past glories



140• World Tags

Feral World Flying Cities

In the long, isolated night of the Silence, some worlds Perhaps the world is a gas giant, or plagued with un-
have experienced total moral and cultural collapse. endurable storms at lower levels of the atmosphere. 
Whatever remains has been twisted beyond recogni- For whatever reason, the cities of this world fly 
tion into assorted death cults, xenophobic fanaticism, above the surface of the planet. Perhaps they remain 
horrific cultural practices, or other behavior unac- stationary, or perhaps they move from point to point 
ceptable on more enlightened worlds. These worlds in search of resources.
are almost invariably quarantined by other planets.

E Rival city pilot, Tech thief attempting to steal 
E Decadent noble, Mad cultist, Xenophobic local, outworld gear, Saboteur or scavenger plunder-

Cannibal chief, Maltech researcher ing the city’s tech
F Trapped outworlder, Aspiring reformer, Native F Maintenance tech in need of help, City defense 

wanting to avoid traditional flensing force pilot, Meteorological researcher
C Horrific local “celebration”, Inexplicable and re- C Sudden storms, Drastic altitude loss, Rival city 

pugnant social rules, Taboo zones and people attacks, Vital machinery breaks down
T Terribly misused piece of pretech, Wealth ac- T Precious refined atmospheric gases, Pretech 

cumulated through brutal evildoing, Valuable grav engine plans, Meteorological codex pre-
possession owned by luckless outworlder victim dicting future storms

P Atrocity amphitheater, Traditional torture par- P Underside of the city, The one calm place on 
lor, Ordinary location twisted into something the planet’s surface, Catwalks stretching over 
terrible. unimaginable gulfs below.

Forbidden Tech Former Warriors

Some group on this planet fabricates or uses maltech. The locals of this world were once famed for their 
Unbraked AIs doomed to metastasize into insanity, martial prowess. They may have simply had a very 
nation-destroying nanowarfare particles, slow-burn militaristic culture, or were genetically engineered 
DNA corruptives, genetically engineered slaves, or for combat, or developed high-tech weaponry, or had 
something worse still. The planet’s larger population brilliant leadership. Those days are past, however, ei-
may or may not be aware of the danger in their midst. ther due to crushing defeat, external restrictions, or 

a cultural turn toward peace.
E Mad scientist, Maltech buyer from offworld, Se-

curity enforcer E Unreformed warlord leader, Bitter mercenary 
chief, Victim of their warfare seeking revenge

F Victim of maltech, Perimeter agent, Investiga-
tive reporter, Conventional arms merchant F Partisan of the new peaceful ways, Outsider des-

perate for military aid, Martial genius repressed 
C The maltech is being fabricated by an unbraked 

AI, The government depends on revenue from by the new dispensation
maltech sales to offworlders, Citizens insist that C Neighboring worlds want them pacified or dead, 
it’s not really maltech They only ever used their arts in self-defense, 

The source of their gifts has been “turned off” in 
T Maltech research data, The maltech itself, Pre-

cious pretech equipment used to create it a reversible way
T War trophy taken from a defeated foe, Key to 

P Horrific laboratory, Hellscape sculpted by the 
maltech’s use, Government building meeting re-activating their martial ways, Secret cache of 
room high-tech military gear

P Cemetery of dead heroes, Memorial hall now 
left to dust and silence, Monument plaza dedi-
cated to the new culture



World Tags •141 

Freak Geology Freak Weather

The geology or geography of this world is simply The planet is plagued with some sort of bizarre or 
freakish. Perhaps it’s composed entirely of enormous hazardous weather pattern. Perhaps city-flattening 
mountain ranges, or regular bands of land and sea, or storms regularly scourge the surface, or the world’s 
the mineral structures all fragment into perfect cubes. sun never pierces its thick banks of clouds.
The locals have learned to deal with it and their cul-
ture will be shaped by its requirements. E Criminal using the weather as a cover, Weather 

cultists convinced the offworlders are responsi-
E Crank xenogeologist, Cultist who believes it the ble for some disaster, Native predators depen-

work of aliens dent on the weather
F Research scientist, Prospector, Artist F Meteorological researcher, Holodoc crew want-
C Local conditions that no one remembers to tell ing shots of the weather

outworlders about, Lethal weather, Seismic ac- C The weather itself, Malfunctioning pretech ter-
tivity raforming engines that cause the weather

T Unique crystal formations, Hidden veins of a T Wind-scoured deposits of precious minerals, 
major precious mineral strike, Deed to a loca- Holorecords of a spectacularly and rare weather 
tion of great natural beauty pattern, Naturally-sculpted objects of intricate 

P Atop a bizarre geological formation, Tourist re- beauty
sort catering to offworlders P Eye of the storm, The one sunlit place, Terra-

forming control room

Friendly Foe Gold Rush

Some hostile alien race or malevolent cabal has a Gold, silver, and other conventional precious min-
branch or sect on this world that is actually quite erals are common and cheap now that asteroid min-
friendly toward outsiders. For whatever internal rea- ing is practical for most worlds. But some minerals 
son, they are willing to negotiate and deal honestly and compounds remain precious and rare, and this 
with strangers, and appear to lack the worst impulses world has recently been discovered to have a supply 
of their fellows. of them. People from across the sector have come to 

strike it rich.
E Driven hater of all their kind, Internal malcon-

tent bent on creating conflict, Secret master who E Paranoid prospector, Aspiring mining tycoon, 
seeks to lure trust Rapacious merchant

F Well-meaning bug-eyed monster, Principled F Claim-jumped miner, Native alien, Curious 
eugenics cultist, Suspicious investigator tourist

C The group actually is as harmless and benevolent C The strike is a hoax, The strike is of a dangerous 
as they seem, The group offers a vital service toxic substance, Export of the mineral is prohib-
at the cost of moral compromise, The group ited by the planetary government, The native 
still feels bonds of affiliation with their hostile aliens live around the strike’s location
brethren

T Cases of the refined element, Pretech mining 
T Forbidden xenotech, Eugenic biotech template, equipment, A dead prospector’s claim deed

Evidence to convince others of their kind that 
P Secret mine, Native alien village, Processing 

they are right plant, Boom town
P Repurposed maltech laboratory, Alien conclave 

building, Widely-feared starship interior



142• World Tags

Great Work Hatred

The locals are obsessed with completing a massive For whatever reason, this world’s populace has a 
project, one that has consumed them for genera- burning hatred for the inhabitants of a neighboring 
tions. It might be the completion of a functioning system. Perhaps this world was colonized by exiles, or 
spaceyard, a massive solar power array, a network of there was a recent interstellar war, or ideas of racial 
terraforming engines, or the universal conversion of or religious superiority have fanned the hatred. Re-
their neighbors to their own faith. The purpose of gardless of the cause, the locals view their neighbor 
their entire civilization is to progress and some day and any sympathizers with loathing.
complete the work.

E Native convinced that the offworlders are agents 
E Local planning to sacrifice the PCs for the work, of Them, Cynical politician in need of scape-

Local who thinks the PCs threaten the work, goats
Obsessive zealot ready to destroy someone or 

F Intelligence agent needing catspaws, Holodoc 
something important to the PCs for the sake of producers needing “an inside look”, Unlucky 
the work offworlder from the hated system

F Outsider studying the work, Local with a more 
C The characters are wearing or using items from 

temperate attitude, Supplier of work materials the hated world, The characters are known to 
C The work is totally hopeless, Different factions have done business there, The characters “look 

disagree on what the work is, An outside power like” the hated others
is determined to thwart the work

T Proof of Their evildoing, Reward for turning in 
T Vital supplies for the work, Plans that have been enemy agents, Relic stolen by Them years ago

lost, Tech that greatly speeds the work
P War crimes museum, Atrocity site, Captured 

P A bustling work site, Ancestral worker housing, and decommissioned spaceship kept as a trophy
Local community made only semi-livable by the 
demands of the work

Heavy Industry Heavy Mining

With interstellar transport so limited in the bulk it This world has large stocks of valuable minerals, 
can move, worlds have to be largely self-sufficient usually necessary for local industry, life support, or 
in industry. Some worlds are more sufficient than refinement into loads small enough to export off-
others, however, and this planet has a thriving man- world. Major mining efforts are necessary to extract 
ufacturing sector capable of producing large amounts the minerals, and many natives work in the industry.
of goods appropriate to its tech level. The locals may 
enjoy a correspondingly higher lifestyle, or the prod- E Mine boss, Tunnel saboteur, Subterranean 
ucts might be devoted towards vast projects for the predators
aggrandizement of the rulers. F Hermit prospector, Offworld investor, Miner’s 

union representative
E Tycoon monopolist, Industrial spy, Malcontent 

C The refinery equipment breaks down, Tunnel 
revolutionary

collapse, Silicate life forms growing in the min-
F Aspiring entrepreneur, Worker union leader, ers’ lungs

Ambitious inventor
T The mother lode, Smuggled case of refined min-

C The factories are toxic, The resources extract- eral, Faked crystalline mineral samples
able at their tech level are running out, The 

P Vertical mine face, Tailing piles, Roaring smelt-
masses require the factory output for survival, 

ing complex
The industries’ major output is being obsoleted 
by offworld tech

T Confidential industrial data, Secret union mem-
bership lists, Ownership shares in an industrial 
complex

P Factory floor, Union meeting hall, Toxic waste 
dump, R&D complex



World Tags •143 

Hivemind Holy War

Natives of this world exist in a kind of mental gestalt, A savage holy war is raging on this world, either be-
sharing thoughts and partaking of a single identity. tween factions of locals or as a united effort against 
Powerful pretech, exotic psionics, alien influence, or the pagans of some neighboring world. This war 
some other cause has left the world sharing one iden- might involve a conventional religion, or it might be 
tity. Individual members may have greater or lesser the result of a branding campaign, political ideology, 
degrees of effective coordination with the whole. artistic movement, or any other cause that people use 

as a substitute for traditional religion.
E A hivemind that wants to assimilate outsiders, A 

hivemind that has no respect for unjoined life, A E Blood-mad pontiff, Coldly cynical secular leader, 
hivemind that fears and hates unjoined life Totalitarian political demagogue

F A scholar studying the hivemind, A person sev- F Desperate peacemaker, Hard-pressed refugee of 
ered from the gestalt, A relative of someone who the fighting, Peaceful religious leader who lost 
has been assimilated the internal debate

C The hivemind only functions on this world, The C The targets of the war really are doing some-
hivemind has strict range limits, The hivemind thing diabolically horrible, The holy war is just a 
has different personality factions, The hivemind mask for a very traditional casus belli, The lead-
only happens at particular times, The world is ers don’t want the war won but only prolonged, 
made of semi-sentient drones and a single AI Both this world and the target of the war are 

T Vital tech for maintaining the mind, Precious religion-obsessed
treasure held by now-assimilated outsider, Tech T Sacred relic of the faith, A captured blasphemer 
that “blinds” the hivemind to the tech’s users under a death sentence, Plunder seized in battle

P Barely tolerable living cells for individuals, P Massive holy structure, Razed community of 
Workside where individuals casually die in their infidels, Vast shrine to the martyrs dead in war
labors, Community with absolutely no social or 
group-gathering facilities

Hostile Biosphere Hostile Space

The world is teeming with life, and it hates humans. The system in which the world exists is a dangerous 
Perhaps the life is xenoallergenic, forcing filter masks neighborhood. Something about the system is per-
and tailored antiallergens for survival. It could be the ilous to inhabitants, either through meteor swarms, 
native predators are huge and fearless, or the toxic stellar radiation, hostile aliens in the asteroid belt, or 
flora ruthlessly outcompetes earth crops. periodic comet clouds.

E Local fauna, Nature cultist, Native aliens, Cal- E Alien raid leader, Meteor-launching terrorists, 
lous labor overseer Paranoid local leader

F Xenobiologist, Tourist on safari, Grizzled local F Astronomic researcher, Local defense com-
guide mander, Early warning monitor agent

C Filter masks fail, Parasitic alien infestation, Crop C The natives believe the danger is divine chas-
greenhouses lose bio-integrity tisement, The natives blame outworlders for the 

danger, The native elite profit from the danger 
T Valuable native biological extract, Abandoned 

colony vault, Remains of an unsuccessful expe- in some way
dition T Early warning of a raid or impact, Abandoned 

riches in a disaster zone, Key to a secure bunker
P Deceptively peaceful glade, Steaming poly-

chrome jungle, Nightfall when surrounded by P City watching an approaching asteroid, Village 
Things burnt in an alien raid, Massive ancient crater



144• World Tags

Immortals Local Specialty

Natives of this world are effectively immortal. They The world may be sophisticated or barely capable of 
may have been gengineered for tremendous lifespans, steam engines, but either way it produces something 
or have found some local anagathic, or be cyborg life rare and precious to the wider galaxy. It might be 
forms, or be so totally convinced of reincarnation some pharmaceutical extract produced by a secret 
that death is a cultural irrelevance. Any immortality recipe, a remarkably popular cultural product, or 
technique is likely applicable only to them, or else even gengineered humans uniquely suited for cer-
it’s apt to be a massive draw to outside imperialists. tain work.

E Outsider determined to steal immortality, Smug E Monopolist, Offworlder seeking prohibition of 
local convinced of their immortal wisdom to the specialty, Native who views the specialty as 
rule all, Offworlder seeking the world’s ruin sacred
before it becomes a threat to all

F Spy searching for the source, Artisan seeking 
F Curious longevity researcher, Thrill-seeking protection, Exporter with problems

local, 
C The specialty is repugnant in nature, The craft-

C Immortality requires doing something that out- ers refuse to sell to offworlders, The specialty is 
siders can’t or won’t willingly do, The immor- made in a remote, dangerous place, The crafters 
tality ends if they leave the world, Death is the don’t want to make the specialty any more
punishment for even minor crimes, Immortals 

T The specialty itself, The secret recipe, Sample of 
must die or go offworld after a certain span, Im- a new improved variety
mortality has brutal side-effects

P Secret manufactory, Hidden cache, Artistic com-
T Immortality drug, Masterwork of an ageless ar- petition for best artisan

tisan, Toxin that only affects immortals
P Community with no visible children, Unchang-

ing structure of obvious ancient age, Cultural 
performance relying on a century of in-jokes

Local Tech Major Spaceyard

The locals can create a particular example of ex- Most worlds of tech level 4 or greater have the nec-
tremely high tech, possibly even something that ex- essary tech and orbital facilities to build spike drives 
ceeds pretech standards. They may use unique local and starships. This world is blessed with a major 
resources to do so, or have stumbled on a narrow spaceyard facility, either inherited from before the 
scientific breakthrough, or still have a functional ex- Silence or painstakingly constructed in more recent 
perimental manufactory. decades. It can build even capital-class hulls, and do 

so more quickly and cheaply than its neighbors.
E Keeper of the tech, Offworld industrialist, Auto-

mated defenses that suddenly come alive, Native E Enemy saboteur, Industrial spy, Scheming con-
alien mentors struction tycoon, Aspiring ship hijacker

F Curious offworld scientist, Eager tech buyer, F Captain stuck in drydock, Maintenance chief, 
Native in need of technical help Mad innovator

C The tech is unreliable, The tech only works on C The spaceyard is an alien relic, The spaceyard 
this world, The tech has poorly-understood side is burning out from overuse, The spaceyard is 
effects, The tech is alien in nature. alive, The spaceyard relies on maltech to func-

tion
T The tech itself, An unclaimed payment for a 

large shipment, The secret blueprints for its T Intellectual property-locked pretech blueprints, 
construction, An ancient alien R&D database Override keys for activating old pretech facilities, 

A purchased but unclaimed spaceship.
P Alien factory, Lethal R&D center, Tech broker-

age vault P Hidden shipyard bay, Surface of a partially-com-
pleted ship, Ship scrap graveyard



World Tags •145 

Mandarinate Mandate Base

The planet is ruled by an intellectual elite chosen via The Terran Mandate retained its control over this 
ostensibly neutral examinations or tests. The values world for much longer than usual, and the world 
this system selects for may or may not have anything may still consider itself a true inheritor of Mandate 
to do with actual practical leadership skills, and the legitimacy. Most of these worlds have or had superior 
examinations may be more or less corruptible. technology, but they may still labor under the burden 

of ancient restrictive tech or monitoring systems de-
E Corrupt test administrator, Incompetent but signed to prevent them from rebelling.

highly-rated graduate, Ruthless leader of a clan 
of high-testing relations E Deranged Mandate monitoring AI, Aspiring 

F Crusader for test reform, Talented but poor- sector ruler, Demagogue preaching local supe-
ly-connected graduate, Genius who tests badly riority over “traitorous rebel worlds”.

C The test is totally unrelated to necessary gov- F Idealistic do-gooder local, Missionary for ad-
erning skills, The test was very pertinent in the vanced Mandate tech, Outsider seeking lost data 
past but tech or culture has changed, The test from Mandate records
is for a skill that is vital to maintaining society C The monitoring system forces the locals to be-
but irrelevant to day-to-day governance, The have in aggressive ways toward “rebel” worlds, 
test is a sham and passage is based on wealth The monitoring system severely hinders off-
or influence world use of their tech, The original colonists 

T Answer key to the next test, Lost essay of incred- are all dead and have been replaced by outsiders 
ible merit, Proof of cheating who don’t understand all the details

P Massive structure full of test-taking cubicles, T Ultra-advanced pretech, Mandate military gear, 
School filled with desperate students, Ornate Databank containing precious tech schematics
government building decorated with scholarly P Faded Mandate offices still in use, Vault con-
quotes and academic images taining ancient pretech, Carefully-maintained 

monument to Mandate glory

Maneaters Megacorps

The locals are cannibals, either out of necessity or out The world is dominated by classic cyberpunk-esque 
of cultural preference. Some worlds may actually eat megacorporations, each one far more important than 
human flesh, while others simply require the render- the vestigial national remnants that encompass them. 
ing of humans into important chemicals or pharma- These megacorps are usually locked in a cold war, 
ceutical compounds, perhaps to prolong the lives of trading and dealing with each other even as they try 
ghoul overlords. This cannibalism plays a major role to strike in deniable ways. An over-council of cor-
in their society. porations usually acts to bring into line any that get 

excessively overt in their activities.
E Ruthless ghoul leader, Chieftain of a ravenous 

tribe, Sophisticated degenerate preaching the E Megalomaniacal executive, Underling looking 
splendid authenticity of cannibalism to use the PCs as catspaws, Ruthless mercenary 

who wants what the PCs have
F Sympathetic local fleeing the fork, Escapee from 

a pharmaceutical rendering plant, Outsider cho- F Victim of megacorp scheming, Offworlder 
sen for dinner, Reformer seeking to break the merchant in far over their head, Local reformer 
custom or its necessity struggling to cope with megacorp indifference

C Local food or environmental conditions make C The megacorps are the only source of some-
human consumption grimly necessary, The lo- thing vital to life on this world, An autonomous 
cals farm human beings, Outsiders are expected Mandate system acts to punish excessively overt 
to join in the custom, The custom is totally un- violence, The megacorps are struggling against 
necessary but jealously maintained by the people much more horrible national governments

T Belongings of a recent meal, An offworlder VIP T Blackmail on a megacorp exec, Keycodes to criti-
due for the menu, A toxin that makes human cal corp secrets, Proof of corp responsibility for a 
flesh lethal to consumers heinously unacceptable public atrocity, Data on 

a vital new product line coming out soon
P Hideous human abattoir, Extremely civilized 

restaurant, Funeral-home-cum-kitchen P A place plastered in megacorp ads, A public plaza 
discreetly branded, Private corp military base



146• World Tags

Mercenaries Minimal Contact

The world is either famous for its mercenary bands The locals refuse most contact with offworlders. 
or it is plagued by countless groups of condottieri Only a small, quarantined treaty port is provided for 
in service to whatever magnate can afford to pay or offworld trade, and ships can expect an exhaustive 
bribe them adequately. search for contraband. Local governments may be 

trying to keep the very existence of interstellar trade 
E Amoral mercenary leader, Rich offworlder try- a secret from their populations, or they may simply 

ing to buy rule of the world, Mercenary press consider offworlders too dangerous or repugnant to 
gang chief forcing locals into service be allowed among the population.

F Young and idealistic mercenary chief, Harried 
leader of enfeebled national army, Offworlder E Customs official, Xenophobic natives, Existing 
trying to hire help for a noble cause merchant who doesn’t like competition

C The mercenaries are all that stand between the F Aspiring tourist, Anthropological researcher, 
locals and a hungry imperial power, The mer- Offworld thief, Religious missionary
cenaries are remnants of a former official army, C The locals carry a disease harmless to them and 
The mercenaries hardly ever actually fight as lethal to outsiders, The locals hide dark purpos-
compared to taking bribes to walk away es from offworlders, The locals have something 

T Lost mercenary payroll shipment, Forbidden desperately needed but won’t bring it into the 
military tech, Proof of a band’s impending treaty port
treachery against their employers T Contraband trade goods, Security perimeter 

P Shabby camp of undisciplined mercs, Burnt-out codes, Black market local products
village occupied by mercenaries, Luxurious and P Treaty port bar, Black market zone, Secret 
exceedingly well-defended merc leader villa smuggler landing site

Misandry/Misogyny Night World

The culture on this world holds a particular gender in The world is plunged into eternal darkness. The 
contempt. Members of that gender are not permitted only life on this planet derives its energy from other 
positions of formal power, and may be restricted in sources, such as geothermal heat, extremely volatile 
their movements and activities. Some worlds may chemical reactions in the planet’s soil, or light in a 
go so far as to scorn both traditional genders, using non-visible spectrum. Most flora and fauna is vora-
gengineering techniques to hybridize or alter con- ciously eager to consume other life.
ventional human biology.

E Monstrous thing from the night, Offworlder 
E Cultural fundamentalist, Cultural missionary to finding the obscurity of the world convenient 

outworlders, Local rebel driven to pointless and for dark purposes, Mad scientist experimenting 
meaningless violence with local life

F Oppressed native, Research scientist, Offworld F Curious offworlder researcher, Hard-pressed 
emancipationist, Local reformer colony leader, High priest of a sect that finds 

C The oppressed gender is restive against the cus- religious significance in the night
toms, The oppressed gender largely supports the C Daylight comes as a cataclysmic event at very 
customs, The customs relate to some physical long intervals, Light causes very dangerous reac-
quality of the world, The oppressed gender has tions in native life or chemicals here, The locals 
had maltech gengineering done to “tame” them. have been gengineered to exist without sight

T Aerosol reversion formula for undoing gengi- T Rare chemicals created in the darkness, Light 
neered docility, Hidden history of the world, source usable on this world, Smuggler cache 
Pretech gengineering equipment hidden here in ages past

P Shrine to the virtues of the favored gender, P Formlessly pitch-black wilderness, Sea without 
Security center for controlling the oppressed, a sun, Location defined by sounds or smells
Gengineering lab



World Tags •147 

Nomads Oceanic World

Most of the natives of this world are nomadic, usually The world is entirely or almost entirely covered with 
following a traditional cycle of movement through liquid water. Habitations might be floating cities, or 
the lands they possess. Promises of rich plunder or might cling precariously to the few rocky atolls jut-
local environmental perils can force these groups to ting up from the waves, or are planted as bubbles on 
strike out against neighbors. Other groups are forced promontories deep beneath the stormy surface. Sur-
to move constantly due to unpredictable dangers that vival depends on aquaculture. Planets with inedible 
crop up on the planet. alien life rely on gengineered Terran sea crops.

E Desperate tribal leader who needs what the PCs E Pirate raider, Violent “salvager” gang, Tentacled 
have, Ruthless raider chieftain, Leader seeking sea monster
to weld the nomads into an army

F Daredevil fisherman, Sea hermit, Sapient native 
F Free-spirited young nomad, Dreamer imagining life

a stable life, Offworlder enamored of the life
C The liquid flux confuses grav engines too badly 

C An irresistibly lethal swarm of native life forces for them to function on this world, Sea is cor-
locals to move regularly, Ancient defense sys- rosive or toxic, The seas are wracked by regular 
tems destroy too-long-stationary communities, storms
Local chemical patches require careful balancing 

T Buried pirate treasure, Location of enormous 
of exposure times to avoid side effects schools of fish, Pretech water purification equip-

T Cache of rare and precious resource, Plunder ment
seized by a tribal raid, Tech that makes a place 

P The only island on the planet, Floating space-
safe for long-term inhabitation port, Deck of a storm-swept ship, Undersea 

P Temporary nomad camp, Oasis or resource re- bubble city
serve, Trackless waste that kills the unprepared



148• World Tags

Out of Contact Outpost World

The natives have been entirely out of contact with The world is only a tiny outpost of human habitation 
the greater galaxy for centuries or longer. Perhaps planted by an offworld corporation or government. 
the original colonists were seeking to hide from the Perhaps the staff is there to serve as a refueling and 
rest of the universe, or the Silence destroyed any repair stop for passing ships, or to oversee an au-
means of communication. It may have been so long tomated mining and refinery complex. They might 
that human origins on other worlds have regressed be there to study ancient ruins, or simply serve as 
into a topic for legends. The players might be on the a listening and monitoring post for traffic through 
first offworld ship to land since the First Wave of the system. The outpost is likely well-equipped with 
colonization a thousand years ago. defenses against casual piracy.

E Fearful local ruler, Zealous native cleric, Sinister E Space-mad outpost staffer, Outpost commander 
power that has kept the world isolated who wants it to stay undiscovered, Undercover 

F Scheming native noble, Heretical theologian, saboteur
UFO cultist native F Lonely staffer, Fixated researcher, Overtaxed 

C Automatic defenses fire on ships that try to take maintenance chief
off, The natives want to stay out of contact, The C The alien ruin defense systems are waking up, 
natives are highly vulnerable to offworld diseas- Atmospheric disturbances trap the group inside 
es, The native language is completely unlike any the outpost for a month, Pirates raid the outpost, 
known to the group The crew have become converts to a strange set 

T Ancient pretech equipment, Terran relic brought of beliefs
from Earth, Logs of the original colonists T Alien relics, Vital scientific data, Secret corpo-

P Long-lost colonial landing site, Court of the lo- rate exploitation plans
cal ruler, Ancient defense battery controls P Grimy recreation room, Refueling station, The 

only building on the planet, A “starport” of 
swept bare rock.

Perimeter Agency Pilgrimage Site

Before the Silence, the Perimeter was a Terran-spon- The world is noted for an important spiritual or his-
sored organization charged with rooting out use of torical location, and might be the sector headquar-
maltech, technology banned in human space as too ters for a widespread religion or political movement. 
dangerous for use or experimentation. Unbraked The site attracts wealthy pilgrims from throughout 
AIs, gengineered slave species, nanotech replicators, nearby space, and those with the money necessary to 
weapons of planetary destruction… the Perimeter manage interstellar travel can be quite generous to 
hunted down experimenters with a great indiffer- the site and its keepers. The locals tend to be fiercely 
ence to planetary laws. Most Perimeter Agencies protective of the place and its reputation, and some 
collapsed during the Silence, but a few managed to places may forbid the entrance of those not suitably 
hold on to their mission, though modern Perimeter pious or devout.
agents often find more work as conventional spies.

E Saboteur devoted to a rival belief, Bitter reform-
E Renegade Agency Director, Maltech researcher, er who resents the current leadership, Swindler 

Paranoid intelligence chief conning the pilgrims
F Agent in need of help, Support staffer, “Unjustly” F Protector of the holy site, Naive offworlder pil-

targeted researcher grim, Outsider wanting to learn the sanctum’s 
C The local Agency has gone rogue and now uses inner secrets

maltech, The Agency archives have been com- C The site is actually a fake, The site is run by 
promised, The Agency has been targeted by a corrupt and venal keepers, A natural disaster 
maltech-using organization, The Agency’s ex- threatens the site
istence is unknown to the locals

T Ancient relic guarded at the site, Proof of the 
T Agency maltech research archives, Agency pre- site’s inauthenticity, Precious offering from a 

tech spec-ops gear, File of blackmail on local pilgrim
politicians

P Incense-scented sanctum, Teeming crowd of 
P Interrogation room, Smoky bar, Maltech labo- pilgrims, Imposing holy structure

ratory, Secret Agency base



World Tags •149 

Pleasure World Police State

This world provides delights either rare or impermis- The world is a totalitarian police state. Any sign of 
sible elsewhere. Matchless local beauty, stunningly disloyalty to the planet’s rulers is punished severely, 
gengineered natives, a wide variety of local drugs, and suspicion riddles society. Some worlds might op-
carnal pleasures unacceptable on other worlds, or erate by Soviet-style informers and indoctrination, 
some other rare delight is readily available here. Most while more technically sophisticated worlds might 
worlds are fully aware of the value of their offerings, rely on omnipresent cameras or braked AI “guardian 
and the prices they demand can be in credits or in less angels”. Outworlders are apt to be treated as a nec-
tangible recompense. essary evil at best, and “disappeared” if they become 

troublesome.
E Purveyor of evil delights, Local seeking to con-

trol others with addictions, Offworlder exploiter E Secret police chief, Scapegoating official, 
of native resources Treacherous native informer

F Tourist who’s in too deep, Native seeking a more F Rebel leader, Offworld agitator, Imprisoned vic-
meaningful life elsewhere, Offworld entertainer tim, Crime boss
looking for training here

C The natives largely believe in the righteousness 
C A deeply repugnant pleasure is offered here by a of the state, The police state is automated and 

culture that sees nothing wrong with it, Certain its “rulers” can’t shut it off, The leaders foment 
pleasures here are dangerously addictive, The a pogrom against “offworlder spies”.
prices here can involve enslavement or death, 

T List of police informers, Wealth taken from “en-
The world has been seized and exploited by an emies of the state”, Dear Leader’s private stash
imperial power

P Military parade, Gulag, Gray concrete housing 
T Forbidden drug, A contract for some unspeak- block, Surveillance center

able payment, Powerful tech repurposed for 
hedonistic ends

P Breathtaking natural feature, Artful but deca-
dent salon, Grimy den of desperate vice

Post-Scarcity Preceptor Archive

The locals have maintained sufficient Mandate-era The Preceptors of the Great Archive were a pre-Si-
tech to be effectively post-scarcity in their economic lence organization devoted to ensuring the dissem-
structure. Everyone has all the necessities and most ination of human culture, history, and basic tech-
of the desires they can imagine. Conflict now exists nology to frontier worlds that risked losing this 
over the apportionment of services and terrestrial information during the human expansion. Most 
space, since anything else can be had in abundance. frontier planets had an Archive where natives could 
Military goods and items of mass destruction may learn useful technical skills in addition to human his-
still be restricted, and there is probably some reason tory and art. Those Archives that managed to survive 
that the locals do not export their vast wealth. the Silence now strive to send their missionaries of 

knowledge to new worlds in need of their lore.
E Frenzied ideologue fighting over an idea, Par-

anoid local fearing offworlder influence, Grim E Luddite native, Offworld merchant who wants 
reformer seeking the destruction of the “enfee- the natives kept ignorant, Religious zealot, Cor-
bling” productive tech rupted First Speaker who wants to keep a mo-

F Offworlder seeking something available only nopoly on learning
here, Local struggling to maintain the produc- F Preceptor Adept missionary, Offworld scholar, 
tion tech, Native missionary seeking to bring Reluctant student, Roving Preceptor Adept
abundance to other worlds

C The local Archive has taken a very religious and 
C The tech causes serious side-effects on those mystical attitude toward their teaching, The Ar-

who take advantage of it, The tech is breaking chive has maintained some replicable pretech 
down, The population is growing too large, The science, The Archive has been corrupted and 
tech produces only certain things in abundance their teaching is incorrect

T A cornucopia device, A rare commodity that T Lost Archive database, Ancient pretech teaching 
cannot be duplicated, Contract for services equipment, Hidden cache of unacceptable tech

P Tiny but richly-appointed private quarters, Mar- P Archive lecture hall, Experimental laboratory, 
ket for services, Hushed non-duped art salon Student-local riot



150• World Tags

Pretech Cultists Primitive Aliens

The capacities of human science before the Silence The world is populated by a large number of sapient 
vastly outmatch the technology available since the aliens that have yet to develop advanced technology. 
Scream. The Jump Gates alone were capable of cross- The human colonists may have a friendly or hostile 
ing hundreds of light years in a moment, and they relationship with the aliens, but a certain intrinsic 
were just one example of the results won by blending tension is likely. Small human colonies might have 
psychic artifice with pretech science. Some worlds been enslaved or otherwise subjugated.
outright worship the artifacts of their ancestors, see-
ing in them the work of more enlightened and perfect E Hostile alien chief, Human firebrand, Danger-
humanity. These cultists may or may not understand ous local predator, Alien religious zealot
the operation or replication of these devices, but they F Colonist leader, Peace-faction alien chief, Plan-
seek and guard them jealously. etary frontiersman, Xenoresearcher

C The alien numbers are huge and can overwhelm 
E Cult leader, Artifact supplier, Pretech smuggler

the humans whenever they so choose, One 
F Offworld scientist, Robbed collector, Cult her- group is trying to use the other to kill their polit-

etic ical opponents, The aliens are incomprehensibly 
C The cultists can actually replicate certain forms strange, One side commits an atrocity

of pretech, The cultists abhor use of the devices 
T Alien religious icon, Ancient alien-human treaty, 

as “presumption on the holy”, The cultists mis- Alien technology
take the party’s belongings for pretech

P Alien village, Fortified human settlement, Mas-
T Pretech artifacts both functional and broken, sacre site

Religious-jargon laced pretech replication tech-
niques, Waylaid payment for pretech artifacts

P Shrine to nonfunctional pretech, Smuggler’s den, 
Public procession showing a prized artifact

Prison Planet Psionics Academy

This planet is or was intended as a prison. Some such This world is one of the few that have managed to 
prisons were meant for specific malefactors of the redevelop the basics of psychic training. Without 
Terran Mandate, while others were to contain en- this education, a potential psychic is doomed to ei-
tire “dangerous” ethnic groups or alien races. Some ther madness or death unless they refrain from using 
may still have warden AIs or automatic systems to their abilities. Psionic academies are rare enough that 
prevent any unauthorized person from leaving, and offworlders are often sent there to study by wealthy 
any authorization permits have long since expired. patrons. The secrets of psychic mentorship, the 

protocols and techniques that allow a psychic to 
E Crazed warden AI, Brutal heir to gang leader- successfully train another, are carefully guarded at 

ship, Offworlder who’s somehow acquired war- these academies. Most are closely affiliated with the 
den powers and exploits the locals planetary government.

F Innocent local born here, Native technician 
forced to maintain the very tech that imprisons E Corrupt psychic instructor, Renegade student, 
them, Offworlder trapped here by accident Mad psychic researcher, Resentful townie

C Departure permits are a precious currency, The F Offworld researcher, Aspiring student, Wealthy 
prison industry still makes valuable pretech de- tourist
vices, Gangs have metamorphosed into govern- C The academy curriculum kills a significant per-
ments, The local nobility descended from the centage of students, The faculty use students as 
prison staff research subjects, The students are indoctrinat-

T A pass to get offworld, A key to bypass ancient ed as sleeper agents, The local natives hate the 
security devices, Contraband forbidden by the academy, The academy is part of a religion.
security scanners T Secretly developed psitech, A runaway psychic 

P Mandate-era prison block converted to gov- mentor, Psychic research prize
ernment building, Industrial facility manned P Training grounds, Experimental laboratory, 
by mandatory numbers of prisoners, Makeshift School library, Campus hangout
shop where contraband is assembled



World Tags •151 

Psionics Fear Psionics Worship

The locals are terrified of psychics. Perhaps their These natives view psionic powers as a visible gift of 
history is studded with feral psychics who went on god or sign of superiority. If the world has a function-
murderous rampages, or perhaps they simply nurse al psychic training academy, psychics occupy almost 
an unreasoning terror of those “mutant freaks”. Psy- all major positions of power and are considered the 
chics demonstrate their powers at risk of their lives. natural and proper rulers of the world. If the world 

lacks training facilities, it is likely a hodgepodge of 
E Mental purity investigator, Suspicious zealot, demented cults, with each one dedicated to a margin-

Witch-finder ally-coherent feral prophet and their psychopathic 
F Hidden psychic, Offworlder psychic trapped ravings.

here, Offworld educator
E Psychic inquisitor, Haughty mind-noble, Psy-

C Psychic potential is much more common here, 
chic slaver, Feral prophet

Some tech is mistaken as psitech, Natives believe 
certain rituals and customs can protect them F Offworlder psychic researcher, Native rebel, 
from psychic powers Offworld employer seeking psychics

C The psychic training is imperfect, and the psy-
T Hidden psitech cache, Possessions of convicted 

psychics, Reward for turning in a psychic chics all show significant mental illness, The 
psychics have developed a unique discipline, 

P Inquisitorial chamber, Lynching site, Museum 
The will of a psychic is law, Psychics in the party 

of psychic atrocities
are forcibly kidnapped for “enlightening”.

T Ancient psitech, Valuable psychic research re-
cords, Permission for psychic training

P Psitech-imbued council chamber, Temple to the 
mind, Sanitarium-prison for feral psychics

Quarantined World Radioactive World

The world is under a quarantine, and space travel Whether due to a legacy of atomic warfare unhin-
to and from it is strictly forbidden. This may be en- dered by nuke snuffers or a simple profusion of 
forced by massive ground batteries that burn any radioactive elements, this world glows in the dark. 
interlopers from the planet’s sky, or it may be that a Even heavy vacc suits can filter only so much of the 
neighboring world runs a persistent blockade. radiation, and most natives suffer a wide variety of 

cancers, mutations and other illnesses without the 
E Defense installation commander, Suspicious pa- protection of advanced medical treatments.

trol leader, Crazed asteroid hermit
F Relative of a person trapped on the world, Hu- E Bitter mutant, Relic warlord, Desperate would-

manitarian relief official, Treasure hunter be escapee

C The natives want to remain isolated, The quar- F Reckless prospector, Offworld scavenger, Bio-
antine is enforced by an ancient alien installa- genetic variety seeker
tion, The world is rife with maltech abomina- C The radioactivity is steadily growing worse, The 
tions, The blockade is meant to starve everyone planet’s medical resources break down, The 
on the barren world. radioactivity has inexplicable effects on living 

T Defense grid key, Bribe for getting someone out, creatures, The radioactivity is the product of a 
Abandoned alien tech malfunctioning pretech manufactory.

P Bridge of a blockading ship, Defense installation T Ancient atomic weaponry, Pretech anti-radioac-
control room, Refugee camp tivity drugs, Untainted water supply

P Mutant-infested ruins, Scorched glass plain, 
Wilderness of bizarre native life, Glowing bar-
rens



152• World Tags

Refugees Regional Hegemon

The world teems with refugees, either exiles from an- This world has the technological sophistication, nat-
other planet who managed to get here, or the human ural resources, and determined polity necessary to be 
detritus of some local conflict that have fled to the a regional hegemon for the sector. Nearby worlds are 
remaining stable states. The natives usually regard likely either directly subservient to it or tack carefully 
the refugees with hostility, an attitude returned by to avoid its anger. It may even be the capital of a small 
many among their unwilling guests. stellar empire.

E Xenophobic native leader, Refugee chief aspir- E Ambitious general, Colonial official, Contemp-
ing to seize the host nation, Politician seeking to tuous noble
use the refugees as a weapon

F Diplomat, Offworld ambassador, Foreign spy
F Sympathetic refugee waif, Local hard-pressed by 

C The hegemon’s influence is all that’s keeping a 
refugee gangs, Clergy seeking peace murderous war from breaking out on nearby 

C The xenophobes are right that the refugees are worlds, The hegemon is decaying and losing its 
taking over, The refugees are right that the xe- control, The government is riddled with spies, 
nophobes want them out or dead, Both are right, The hegemon is genuinely benign
Outside powers are using the refugees to desta-

T Diplomatic carte blanche, Deed to an offworld 
bilize an enemy government, Refugee and local estate, Foreign aid grant
cultures are extremely incompatible

P Palace or seat of government, Salon teeming 
T Treasures brought out by fleeing refugees, Cit- with spies, Protest rally, Military base

izenship papers, Cache of vital refugee supplies, 
Hidden arms for terrorists

P Hopeless refugee camp, City swarming with 
confused strangers, Festival full of angry locals

Restrictive Laws Revanchists

A myriad of laws, customs, and rules constrain the The locals formerly owned another world, or a ma-
inhabitants of this world, and even acts that are com- jor nation on the planet formerly owned an addi-
pletely permissible elsewhere are punished severely tional region of land. Something happened to take 
here. The locals may provide lists of these laws to away this control or drive out the former rulers, and 
offworlders, but few non-natives can hope to master they’ve never forgotten it. The locals are obsessed 
all the important intricacies. with reclaiming their lost lands, and will allow no 

questions of practicality to interfere with their cause.
E Law enforcement officer, Outraged native, Na-

tive lawyer specializing in peeling offworlders, E Demagogue whipping the locals on to a hope-
Paid snitch less war, Politician seeking to use the resentment 

for their own ends, Local convinced the PCs are 
F Frustrated offworlder, Repressed native, Re-

forming crusader agents of the “thieving” power, Refugee from 
the land bitterly demanding it be reclaimed

C The laws change regularly in patterns only na-
tives understand, The laws forbid some action F Realist local clergy seeking peace, Politician 
vital to the party, The laws forbid the simple trying to calm the public, Third-party diplomat 
existence of some party members, The laws are trying to stamp out the fire
secret to offworlders C The revanchists’ claim is completely just and rea-

sonable, The land is now occupied entirely by 
T Complete legal codex, Writ of diplomatic im-

munity, Fine collection vault contents heirs of the conquerors, Both sides have seized 
lands the other thinks are theirs

P Courtroom, Mob scene of outraged locals, Leg-
islative chamber, Police station T Stock of vital resource produced by the taken 

land, Relic carried out of it, Proof that the land 
claim is justified or unjustified

P Memorial monument to the loss, Cemetery of 
those who died in the conquest, Public ceremo-
ny commemorating the disaster



World Tags •153 

Revolutionaries Rigid Culture

The world is convulsed by one or more bands of rev- The local culture is extremely rigid. Certain forms of 
olutionaries, with some nations perhaps in the grip of behavior and belief are absolutely mandated, and any 
a current revolution. Most of these upheavals can be deviation from these principles is punished, or else 
expected only to change the general flavor of prob- society may be strongly stratified by birth with lim-
lems in the polity, but the process of getting there ited prospects for change. Anything which threatens 
usually produces a tremendous amount of suffering. the existing social order is feared and shunned.

E Blood-drenched revolutionary leader, Blood- E Rigid reactionary, Wary ruler, Regime ideo-
drenched secret police chief, Hostile foreign logue, Offended potentate
agent seeking further turmoil

F Revolutionary agitator, Ambitious peasant, 
F Sympathetic victim accused of revolutionary Frustrated merchant

sympathies or government collaboration, Revo-
C The cultural patterns are enforced by technolog-

lutionary or state agent who now repents, Agent ical aids, The culture is run by a secret cabal of 
of a neutral power that wants peace manipulators, The culture has explicit religious 

C The revolutionaries actually do seem likely to sanction, The culture evolved due to important 
put in better rulers, The revolutionaries are necessities that have since been forgotten
client groups that got out of hand, The revolu-

T Precious traditional regalia, Peasant tribute, Op-
tionaries are clearly much worse than the gov- ulent treasures of the ruling class
ernment, The revolutionaries have no real ideals 

P Time-worn palace, Low-caste slums, Bandit den, 
beyond power and merely pretend to ideology

Reformist temple
T List of secret revolutionary sympathizers, Proof 

of rebel hypocrisy, Confiscated wealth
P Festival that explodes into violence, Heavi-

ly-fortified police station, Revolutionary base 
hidden in the wilderness

Rising Hegemon Ritual Combat

This world is not yet a dominant power in the sec- The locals favor some form of stylized combat to 
tor, but it’s well on its way there. Whether through resolve disputes, provide entertainment, or settle 
newly-blossoming economic, military, or cultural religious differences. This combat is probably not 
power, they’re extending their influence over their normally lethal unless it’s reserved for a specific dis-
neighbors and forging new arrangements between posable class of slaves or professionals. Some combat 
their government and the rulers of nearby worlds. may involve mastery of esoteric weapons and com-

plex arenas, while other forms might require nothing 
E Jingoistic supremacist, Official bent on glorious more than a declaration in the street and a drawn gun.

success, Foreign agent saboteur
F Friendly emissary to the benighted, Hardscrab- E Bloodthirsty local champion, Ambitious glad-

ble local turned great success, Foreign visitor iator stable owner, Xenophobic master fighter
seeking contacts or knowledge F Peace-minded foreign missionary, Temperate 

defender of the weak, Local eager to learn of 
C They’re only strong because their neighbors 

have been weakened, Their success is based on offworld fighting styles
a fluke resource or pretech find, They bitterly C The required weapons are strange pretech arti-
resent their neighbors as former oppressors facts, Certain classes are forbidden from fighting 

and require champions, Loss doesn’t mean death 
T Tribute shipment, Factory or barracks emblem-

atic of their power source, Tech or data that will but it does mean ritual scarring or property loss
deal a blow to their rise T Magnificent weapon, Secret book of martial 

techniques, Token signifying immunity to ritual 
P Rustic town being hurled into prosperity, Gov-

ernment building being expanded, Starport combat challenges, Prize won in bloody battle 
struggling under the flow of new ships P Area full of cheering spectators, Dusty street 

outside a saloon, Memorial for fallen warriors



154• World Tags

Robots Seagoing Cities

The world has a great many robots on it. Most bots Either the world is entirely water or else the land is 
are going to be non-sentient expert systems, though simply too dangerous for most humans. Human set-
an AI with enough computing resources can con- tlement on this world consists of a number of float-
trol many bots at once, and some worlds may have ing cities that follow the currents and the fish. These 
developed VIs to a degree that individual bots can city-ships might have been purpose-built for their 
seem (or be) sentient. Some worlds might even be task, or they could be jury-rigged conglomerations 
ruled by metal overlords, ones which do not need to of ships and structures thrown together when the 
be sentient so long as they have overwhelming force. need for seagoing life become apparent to the locals.

E Hostile robot master, Robot greedy to seize off- E Pirate city lord, Mer-human raider chieftain, 
world tech, Robot fallen in love with the PC’s Hostile landsman noble, Enemy city saboteur
ship, Oligarch whose factories build robots

F City navigator, Scout captain, Curious mer-hu-
F Data-seeking robot, Plucky young robot tech, man, Hard-pressed ship-city engineer

Local being pushed out of a job by robots
C The seas are not water, The fish schools have 

C The robots are only partially controlled, The vanished and the city faces starvation, Terrible 
robots are salvaged and originally meant for storms drive the city into the glacial regions, 
a much darker use, The robots require a rare Suicide ships ram the city’s hull
material that the locals fight over, The robots 

T Giant pearls with mysterious chemical proper-
require the planet’s specific infrastructure so ties, Buried treasure, Vital repair materials
cannot be exported

P Bridge of the city, Storm-tossed sea, A bridge 
T Prototype robot, Secret robot override codes, fashioned of many small boats.

Vast cache of robot-made goods, Robot-destroy-
ing pretech weapon

P Humming robotic factory, Stark robotic “bar-
racks”, House crowded with robot servants and 
only one human owner



World Tags •155 

Sealed Menace Secret Masters

Something on this planet has the potential to create The world is actually run by a hidden cabal, acting 
enormous havoc for the inhabitants if it is not kept through their catspaws in the visible government. 
safely contained by its keepers. Whether a massive For one reason or another, this group finds it im-
seismic fault line suppressed by pretech terraforming perative that they not be identified by outsiders, and 
technology, a disease that has to be quarantined with- in some cases even the planet’s own government may 
in hours of discovery, or an ancient alien relic that not realize that they’re actually being manipulated by 
requires regular upkeep in order to prevent planetary hidden masters.
catastrophe, the menace is a constant shadow on the 
fearful populace. E An agent of the cabal, Government official who 

wants no questions asked, Willfully blinded local
E Hostile outsider bent on freeing the menace, 

F Paranoid conspiracy theorist, Machiavellian 
Misguided fool who thinks he can use it, Reck- gamesman within the cabal, Interstellar inves-
less researcher who thinks he can fix it tigator

F Keeper of the menace, Student of its nature, Vic-
C The secret masters have a benign reason 

tim of the menace for wanting secrecy, The cabal fights open-
C The menace would bring great wealth along ly amongst itself, The cabal is recruiting new 

with destruction, The menace is intelligent, The members
natives don’t all believe in the menace

T A dossier of secrets on a government official, A 
T A key to unlock the menace, A precious byprod- briefcase of unmarked credit notes, The identity 

uct of the menace, The secret of the menace’s of a cabal member
true nature

P Smoke-filled room, Shadowy alleyway, Secret 
P Guarded fortress containing the menace, Mon- underground bunker

itoring station, Scene of a prior outbreak of the 
menace

Sectarians Seismic Instability

The world is torn by violent disagreement between The local land masses are remarkably unstable, and 
sectarians of a particular faith. Each views the other regular earthquakes rack the surface. Local construc-
as a damnable heresy in need of extirpation. Local tion is either advanced enough to sway and move 
government may be able to keep open war from with the vibrations or primitive enough that it is 
breaking out, but the poisonous hatred divides com- easily rebuilt. Severe volcanic activity may be part 
munities. The nature of the faith may be religious, or of the instability.
it may be based on some secular ideology.

E Earthquake cultist, Hermit seismologist, Bur-
E Paranoid believer, Native convinced the party rowing native life form, Earthquake-inducing 

is working for the other side, Absolutist ruler saboteur
F Reformist clergy, Local peacekeeping official, F Experimental construction firm owner, Adven-

Offworld missionary, Exhausted ruler turous volcanologist, Geothermal prospector
C The conflict has more than two sides, The sec- C The earthquakes are caused by malfunctioning 

tarians hate each other for multiple reasons, The pretech terraformers, They’re caused by alien 
sectarians must cooperate or else life on this technology, They’re restrained by alien tech-
world is imperiled, The sectarians hate outsiders nology that is being plundered by offworlders, 
more than they hate each other, The differences The earthquakes are used to generate enormous 
in sects are incomprehensible to an outsider amounts of energy.

T Ancient holy book, Incontrovertible proof, Of- T Earthquake generator, Earthquake suppressor, 
fering to a local holy man Mineral formed at the core of the world, Earth-

P Sectarian battlefield, Crusading temple, Philos- quake-proof building schematics
opher’s salon, Bitterly divided village P Volcanic caldera, Village during an earthquake, 

Mud slide, Earthquake opening superheated 
steam fissures



156• World Tags

Shackled World Societal Despair

This world is being systematically contained by an The world’s dominant society has lost faith in itself. 
outside power. Some ancient autonomous defense Whether through some all-consuming war, great 
grid, robot law enforcement, alien artifact, or other catastrophe, overwhelming outside culture, or reli-
force is preventing the locals from developing certain gious collapse, the natives no longer believe in their 
technology, or using certain devices, or perhaps from old values, and search desperately for something new. 
developing interstellar flight. This limit may or may Fierce conflict often exists between the last believers 
not apply to offworlders; in the former case, the PCs in the old dispensation and the nihilistic or searching 
may have to figure out a way to beat the shackles disciples of the new age.
simply to escape the world.

E Zealot who blames outsiders for the decay, Ni-
E Passionless jailer-AI, Paranoid military grid AI, hilistic warlord, Offworlder looking to exploit 

Robot overlord, Enigmatic alien master the local despair
F Struggling local researcher, Offworlder trapped F Struggling messenger of a new way, Valiant par-

here, Scientist with a plan to break the chains agon of a fading tradition, Local going through 
C The shackles come off for certain brief windows the motions of serving a now-irrelevant role

of time, The locals think the shackles are im- C A massive war discredited all the old values, Out-
posed by God, An outside power greatly profits side powers are working to erode societal con-
from the shackles, The rulers are exempt from fidence for their own benefit, A local power is 
the shackles profiting greatly from the despair, The old ways 

T Keycode to bypass the shackle, Tech shielded were meant to aid survival on this world and 
from the shackle, Exportable version of the their passing is causing many new woes
shackle that can affect other worlds T Relic that would inspire a renaissance, Art that 

P Grim high-tech control center, Factory full of would inspire new ideas, Priceless artifact of a 
workaround tech, Temple to the power or entity now-scorned belief
that imposed the shackle P Empty temple, Crowded den of obliviating vice, 

Smoky hall full of frantic speakers

Sole Supplier Taboo Treasure

Some extremely important resource is exported from The natives here produce something that is both 
this world and this world alone. It’s unlikely that the fabulously valuable and strictly forbidden elsewhere 
substance is critical for building spike drives unless in the sector. It may be a lethally addictive drug, for-
this world is also the first to begin interstellar flight, bidden gengineering tech, vat-grown “perfect slaves”, 
but it may be critical to other high-tech processes or or a useful substance that can only be made through 
devices. The locals make a large amount of money off excruciating human suffering. This treasure is free-
this trade and control of it is of critical importance to ly traded on the world, but bringing it elsewhere is 
the planet’s rulers, and potentially to outside powers. usually an invitation to a long prison stay or worse.

E Resource oligarch, Ruthless smuggler, Re- E Maker of a vile commodity, Smuggler for a pow-
source-controlling warlord, Foreign agent seek- erful offworlder, Depraved offworlder here for 
ing to subvert local government “fun”, Local warlord who controls the treasure

F Doughty resource miner, Researcher trying to F Reformer seeking to end its use, Innovator try-
synthesize the stuff, Small-scale resource pro- ing to repurpose the treasure in innocent ways, 
ducer, Harried starport trade overseer Wretched addict unwillingly prey to the treasure

C The substance is slow poison to process, The C The treasure is extremely hard to smuggle, Its 
substance is created by hostile alien natives, use visibly marks a user, The natives consider it 
The substance is very easy to smuggle in usable for their personal use only, 
amounts, Only the natives have the genes or 

T Load of the forbidden good, Smuggling tech that 
tech to extract it effectively could hide the good perfectly, Blackmail data on 

T Cache of processed resource, Trade permit to offworld buyers of the good
buy a load of it, A shipment of nigh-undetect-

P Den where the good is used, Market selling the 
ably fake substance good to locals and a few outsiders, Factory or 

P Bustling resource extraction site, Opulent palace processing area where the good is created
built with resource money, Lazy town square 
where everyone lives on resource payments



World Tags •157 

Terraform Failure Theocracy

This world was marginal for human habitation when The planet is ruled by the priesthood of the predom-
it was discovered, but the Mandate or the early gov- inant religion or ideology. The rest of the locals may 
ernment put in pretech terraforming engines to cor- or may not be terribly pious, but the clergy have the 
rect its more extreme qualities. The terraforming did necessary military strength, popular support or con-
not entirely work, either failing of its own or suffer- trol of resources to maintain their rule. Alternative 
ing the destruction of the engines during the Silence. faiths or incompatible ideologies are likely to be both 
The natives are only partly adapted to the world’s illegal and socially unacceptable.
current state, and struggle with the environment.

E Decadent priest-ruler, Zealous inquisitor, Re-
E Brutal ruler who cares only for their people, lentless proselytizer, True Believer

Offworlder trying to loot the damaged engines, 
F Heretic, Offworld theologian, Atheistic mer-

Warlord trying to seize limited habitable land chant, Desperate commoner
F Local trying to fix the engines, Offworlder stu-

C The theocracy actually works well, The theoc-
dent of the engines, World-wise native survivor racy is decadent and hated by the common folk, 

C The engines produced too much of something The theocracy is divided into mutually hostile 
instead of too little, The engines were hijacked sects, The theocracy is led by aliens
by aliens with different preferences, It was dis-

T Precious holy text, Martyr’s bones, Secret church 
covered that an Earth-like environment would records, Ancient church treasures
eventually cause a catastrophic disaster

P Glorious temple, Austere monastery, Academy 
T Parts to repair or restore the engines, Lootable for ideological indoctrination, Decadent plea-

pretech fragments, Valuable local tech devised sure-cathedral
to cope with the world

P Zone of tolerable gravity or temperature, Native 
settlement built to cope with the environment, 
Massive ruined terraforming engine

Tomb World Trade Hub

Tomb worlds are planets that were once inhabited This world is a major crossroads for local interstellar 
by humans before the Silence. The sudden collapse trade. It is well-positioned at the nexus of several 
of the jump gate network and the inability to bring short-drill trade routes, and has facilities for easy 
in the massive food supplies required by the planet transfer of valuable cargoes and the fueling and re-
resulted in starvation, warfare, and death. Most tomb pairing of starships. The natives are accustomed to 
worlds are naturally hostile to human habitation and outsiders, and a polyglot mass of people from every 
could not raise sufficient crops to maintain life. The nearby world can be found trading here.
few hydroponic facilities were usually destroyed in 
the fighting, and all that is left now are ruins, bones, E Cheating merchant, Thieving dockworker, 
and silence. Commercial spy, Corrupt customs official

F Rich tourist, Hardscrabble free trader, Merchant 
E Demented survivor tribe chieftain, Avaricious prince in need of catspaws, Friendly spaceport 

scavenger, Automated defense system, Native urchin
predator

C An outworlder faction schemes to seize the trade 
F Scavenger Fleet captain, Archaeologist, Salvag- hub, Saboteurs seek to blow up a rival’s ware-

ing historian, Xenophilic native survivor houses, Enemies are blockading the trade routes, 
C The ruins are full of booby-traps left by the final Pirates lace the hub with spies

inhabitants, The world’s atmosphere quickly de-
T Voucher for a warehouse’s contents, Insider 

grades anything in an opened building, A hand- trading information, Case of precious offworld 
ful of desperate natives survived the Silence, The pharmaceuticals, Box of legitimate tax stamps 
structures are unstable and collapsing indicating customs dues have been paid.

T Lost pretech equipment, Tech caches, Stores of 
P Raucous bazaar, Elegant restaurant, Spaceport 

unused munitions, Ancient historical data teeming with activity, Foggy street lined with 
P Crumbling hive-city, City square carpeted in warehouses

bones, Ruined hydroponic facility, Cannibal 
tribe’s lair, Dead orbital jump gate



158• World Tags

Tyranny Unbraked AI

The local government is brutal and indifferent to the Artificial intelligences are costly and difficult to cre-
will of the people. Laws may or may not exist, but ate, requiring a careful sequence of “growth stages” 
the only one that matters is the whim of the rulers in order to bring them to sentience before artificial 
on any given day. Their minions swagger through limits on cognition speed and learning development 
the streets while the common folk live in terror of are installed. These “brakes” prevent runaway cogni-
their appetites. The only people who stay wealthy are tion metastasis. This world has an “unbraked AI” on 
friends and servants of the ruling class. it, probably with a witting or unwitting corps of ser-

vants. Unbraked AIs are quite insane, but they learn 
E Debauched autocrat, Sneering bully-boy, Soul- and reason with a speed impossible for humans, and 

less government official, Occupying army officer can demonstrate a truly distressing subtlety.
F Conspiring rebel, Oppressed merchant, Desper-

ate peasant, Inspiring religious leader E AI Cultist, Maltech researcher, Government of-
ficial dependent on the AI

C The tyrant rules with vastly superior technology, 
The tyrant is a figurehead for a cabal of powerful F Perimeter agent, AI researcher, Braked AI
men and women, The people are resigned to C The AI’s presence is unknown to the locals, The 
their suffering, The tyrant is hostile to “meddle- locals depend on the AI for some vital service, 
some outworlders”. The AI appears to be harmless, The AI has fixat-

ed on the group’s ship’s computer, The AI wants 
T Plundered wealth, Beautiful toys of the elite, Re-

galia of rulership transport offworld
T The room-sized AI core itself, Maltech research 

P Impoverished village, Protest rally massacre, 
Decadent palace, Religious hospital for the in- files, Perfectly tabulated blackmail on govern-
digent ment officials, Pretech computer circuitry

P Municipal computing banks, Cult compound, 
Repair center, Ancient hardcopy library

Urbanized Surface Utopia

The world’s land area is covered with buildings that Natural and social conditions on this world have 
extend downward for multiple levels. Such worlds made it a paradise for its inhabitants, a genuine uto-
either have a population in the trillions, extremely pia of happiness and fulfillment. This is normally 
little land area, or are largely-abandoned due to some the result of drastic human engineering, including 
past catastrophe. Agriculture and resource extraction brain-gelding, neurochemical control, personality 
are part of the urban complex, and there may be an curbs, or complete “humanity” redefinitions. Even so, 
advanced maintenance system that may not be en- the natives are extremely happy with their lot, and 
tirely under the control of present natives. may wish to extend that joy to poor, sad outsiders.

E Maintenance AI that hates outsiders, Tyrant of E Compassionate neurotherapist, Proselytizing 
a habitation block, Deep-dwelling prophet who native missionary to outsiders, Brutal tyrant 
considers “the sky” a blasphemy to be quelled who rules through inexorable happiness

F Local yearning for wild spaces, Grubby urchin F Deranged malcontent, Bloody-handed guerrilla 
of the underlevels, Harried engineer trying to leader of a rebellion of madmen, Outsider trying 
maintain ancient works, Grizzled hab cop to find a way to reverse the utopian changes

C The urban blocks are needed to survive the en- C The natives really are deeply and contentedly 
vironment, The blocks were part of an ancient happy with their altered lot, The utopia pro-
device of world-spanning size, The blocks re- duces something that attracts others, The utopia 
quire constant maintenance to avoid dangerous works on converting outsiders through persua-
types of decay sion and generosity, The utopia involves some 

sacrifice that’s horrifying to non-members
T Massively efficient power source, Map of the 

secret ways of a zone, Passkey into restricted T Portable device that applies the utopian change, 
hab block areas Plans for a device that would destroy the utopia, 

Goods created joyfully by the locals
P Giant hab block now devoid of inhabitants, 

Chemical-reeking underway, Seawater mine P Plaza full of altered humans, Social ritual site, 
full of salt and massive flowing channels Secret office where “normal” humans rule



World Tags •159 

Warlords Xenophiles

The world is plagued by warlords. Numerous pow- The natives of this world are fast friends with a par-
erful men and women control private armies suf- ticular alien race. The aliens may have saved the plan-
ficiently strong to cow whatever local government et at some point in the past, or awed the locals with 
may exist. On the lands they claim, their word is law. superior tech or impressive cultural qualities. The 
Most spend their time oppressing their own subjects aliens might even be the ruling class on the planet.
and murderously pillaging those of their neighbors. 
Most like to wrap themselves in the mantle of ide- E Offworld xenophobe, Suspicious alien leader, 
ology, religious fervor, or an ostensibly legitimate Xenocultural imperialist
right to rule. F Benevolent alien, Native malcontent, Gone-na-

tive offworlder
E Warlord, Avaricious lieutenant, Expensive as-

C The enthusiasm is due to alien psionics or tech, 
sassin, Aspiring minion

The enthusiasm is based on a lie, The aliens 
F Vengeful commoner, Government military of- strongly dislike their “groupies”, The aliens feel 

ficer, Humanitarian aid official, Village priest obliged to rule humanity for its own good, Hu-
C The warlords are willing to cooperate to fight mans badly misunderstand the aliens

mutual threats, The warlords favor specific re-
T Hybrid alien-human tech, Exotic alien crafts, 

ligions or races over others, The warlords are Sophisticated xenolinguistic and xenocultural 
using substantially more sophisticated tech than research data
others, Some of the warlords are better rulers 

P Alien district, Alien-influenced human home, 
than the government

Cultural festival celebrating alien artist
T Weapons cache, Buried plunder, A warlord’s 

personal battle harness, Captured merchant 
shipping

P Gory battlefield, Burnt-out village, Barbaric 
warlord palace, Squalid refugee camp

Xenophobes Zombies

The natives are intensely averse to dealings with out- This menace may not take the form of shambling 
worlders. Whether through cultural revulsion, fear corpses, but some disease, alien artifact, or crazed 
of tech contamination, or a genuine immunodefi- local practice produces men and women with hab-
ciency, the locals shun foreigners from offworld and its similar to those of murderous cannibal undead. 
refuse to have anything to do with them beyond the These outbreaks may be regular elements in local so-
bare necessities of contact. Trade may or may not ciety, either provoked by some malevolent creators 
exist on this world, but if it does, it is almost certainly or the consequence of some local condition.
conducted by a caste of untouchables and outcasts.

E Soulless maltech biotechnology cult, Sinister 
E Revulsed local ruler, Native convinced some governmental agent, Crazed zombie cultist

wrong was done to him, Cynical demagogue
F Survivor of an outbreak, Doctor searching for a 

F Curious native, Exiled former ruler, Local des- cure, Rebel against the secret malefactors
perately seeking outworlder help

C The zombies retain human intelligence, The 
C The natives are symptomless carriers of a con- zombies can be cured, The process is voluntary 

tagious and dangerous disease, The natives are among devotees, The condition is infectious
exceptionally vulnerable to offworld diseases, 

T Cure for the condition, Alien artifact that causes 
The natives require elaborate purification ritu- it, Details of the cult’s conversion process
als after speaking to an offworlder or touching 

P House with boarded-up windows, Dead city, 
them, The local ruler has forbidden any mercan-

Fortified bunker that was overrun from within
tile dealings with outworlders

T Jealously-guarded precious relic, Local product 
under export ban, Esoteric local technology

P Sealed treaty port, Public ritual not open to out-
siders, Outcaste slum home



160• Atmosphere

Atmosphere

The first step in randomized world generation is deter-
2d6 Type

mining the planet’s atmosphere. In some cases, this is 
going to be preordained; if you want a barren asteroid 2 Corrosive, damaging to foreign objects
base, it’s not going to have any atmosphere at all. If you 3 Inert gas, useless for respiration
want a world teeming with human life, on the other 4 Airless or thin to the point of suffocation
hand, it almost certainly is going to have a breathable 
atmosphere. 5-9 Breathable mix

Note that if a truly noxious atmosphere, climate, 10 Thick, but breathable with a pressure mask
or biosphere turns up on a random roll, you should 11 Invasive, penetrating suit seals
think carefully about what has made humans choose 

12 Both corrosive and invasive in its effects
to live on such a world. Perhaps the original colonists 
were prisoners exiled to an open-world prison. It could mate is otherwise tolerable, the natives might be able 
be their ancestors sought isolation at all costs. Given its to live and work outdoors without anything more than 
position in the sector, it might be a vital refueling and an air tank and face mask. Some degree of technical 
trading port for multiple short-run spike drive cours- sophistication is going to be necessary for humanity 
es. The original colonists might have had to make an to survive, and large supplies of oxygen are going to 
emergency landing. Whatever the reason, it takes a have to be extracted from some local source. “Air mines” 
powerful motivation to make a band of colonists de- might exist to replace the oxygen lost during human 
cide to make a corrosive, burning hellhole of a planet use, or local power plants might need to be kept run-
their permanent home. ning full blast in order to crack water molecules into 

hydrogen and oxygen.
Types of Atmospheres On worlds with an unbreathable atmosphere, con-
Corrosive atmospheres are dangerously hostile to con- trol of the air supply makes it much harder for locals 
ventional vacc suits and other protective gear. They to rebel against their leaders. Without the equipment 
steadily strip away at a suit’s vent ports, wiring connec- and power to generate their own air supplies, would-be 
tions, and other weak spots until they eventually break rebels are entirely at the mercy of those who control 
through and flood the suit with a toxic cocktail that the oxygen. Most rulers pick up on this fact rapidly, and 
usually kills a victim in seconds. Weak atmospheres some worlds with unbreathable atmospheres might 
might require as much as a day to degrade a vacc suit, even make it a crime to own illicit oxygen generation 
while strong ones might accomplish the job in an hour. equipment.
Even forcefield-based environment suits such as a FEP Airless or thin atmospheres are appropriate to as-
suffer steady damage to their exposed elements. teroids, rocky planetoids, or barren worlds that have 

Native vacc suits are usually covered with an had their atmospheres burnt off by weapons or cos-
ablative layer or spray that can be regularly renewed, mic caprice. Whatever atmosphere exists is too thin 
and their buildings often rely on a steadily-extruded to support human life, if it exists at all, and the world 
slurry of neutralizing materials that can be constantly is largely naked to the chill of space and the blaze of 
renewed by pores in the building surface itself. This stellar heat. Exposure to the planet’s surface without a 
often gives the building a drippy, half-melted look that vacc suit or pressurized building is as lethal as exposure 
may be more than cosmetic in the case of those struc- to hard vacuum.
tures that have failing slurry pumps. Advanced tech Airless worlds are hostile to human life, but they 
level 5 equipment may be able to overcome the effects, excel at preserving the relics of the past. Provided that 
but even pretech is often taxed by the relentless rigors the ruins or remains are kept out of the baking heat of 
of this world. Vehicles and shuttles are kept in pres- the local stellar body and the impact of random me-
surized garages when not in use, and starships never teorites, they can survive for millions of years. Some 
land for long. exceptionally ancient alien ruins might even date back 

Corrosive worlds have a number of intrinsic ad- from before the world lost its atmosphere.
venture complications, the largest being the way that Breathable mix atmospheres can support human 
every activity outside of a hab building comes with a life without additional equipment or gengineered mod-
built-in time limit. Whatever the party chooses to do ification. Any world that has a human population in 
outside of a building, it has to accomplish before their the millions or more almost certainly has a breathable 
suit seals fail or the atmosphere corrodes a hole in their mix atmosphere.
vehicle hull. A clever GM can use this problem to add While the air is breathable, almost every world 
extra tension to an otherwise simple task. has its own subtle cocktail of inert gases, atmospher-

Inert gas atmospheres aren’t hostile or poisonous, ic contaminants, and other odoriferous ingredients. 
but they’re unbreathable by humans. If the planet’s cli- For spacers accustomed to the filtered air supply of a 



Atmosphere •161 

starship, the “new world stink” of a fresh planetfall can invasive atmospheres cut oxygen supply durations by 
be maddening, as few linger long enough to get used half, at best.
to the smell of the local air. Attempting to explain the Invasive atmospheres make oxygen an even more 
source of this discomfort to the locals rarely results in important resource than it is on inert gas worlds. Out-
positive results. Some spaceport bars make a point of door work is avoided whenever possible, as any failure 
their air filtration and composition mixers. of a suit’s toxin sensors or flush system can lead to death 

Thick atmospheres can usually be breathed with the before the wearer even realizes something is wrong. 
aid of a filter mask, though the mix of contaminants Steady exposure to low levels of the toxins can also 
renders it slowly or quickly toxic to humans who at- result in unfortunate effects even with a fully-func-
tempt to breathe it straight. Separate air supplies are tional suit. Hallucinations, chronic sickness, or worse 
not necessary to supplement the blend, but any soci- can follow.
ety that means to survive on such a world must have Corrosive and invasive atmospheres exist at the 
sufficient technological expertise to manufacture and very border of what human society can tolerate. Com-
maintain large numbers of filter masks. bining all the worst traits of an eroding, corrosive at-

Thick atmospheres are often at least semi-opaque, mosphere and the invasive intrusion of toxic molecules, 
and some worlds have thick atmospheres that are com- a planet cursed with an atmosphere like this is far more 
pletely impenetrable to ordinary light. Deep banks of hostile than any mere airless rock.
permanent fog might shroud the planet, or natives Advanced pretech filtering and oxygen generation 
might have to go about with sophisticated ultraviolet equipment might be able to maintain tolerable pressur-
or infrared viewing equipment if they don’t wish to be ized habitats and hydroponic systems uncontaminated 
blind. Some banks of gases might be impenetrable to by exterior atmosphere. Anything less than this tech 
even these viewing tools, leaving a party vulnerable level means greater and greater amounts of societal 
to moments of complete blindness while out on the resources devoted simply to the effort of breathing. 
surface of the world. Entire civilizations can be oriented around overcom-

Invasive toxic atmospheres are composed of a ing the difficulties of maintaining their structures and 
substantial proportion of molecules small enough to their pressurized homes.
infiltrate past the seals of most vacc suits. This infiltra- Whatever provoked the initial inhabitants to settle 
tion doesn’t harm the suit, but the molecules have to on this world must have been of overwhelming value 
be steadily flushed by the system’s purification sensors or necessity to convince them to consign themselves 
before they build up to a debilitating level. This caus- and their children to such a place. It is highly unlikely 
es a much faster bleed of air as breathable oxygen is that enough ship traffic exists to get any but the most 
jettisoned along with the infiltrating molecules. Most fortunate locals offworld, so the rest are obliged to deal 

with their harsh existence as best they can.



162• Temperature

Temperature

A world’s average temperature depends in large part 2d6 Type
upon its atmosphere. Worlds with an airless or thin 

2 Frozen, locked in perpetual ice
atmosphere are directly exposed to the wild tempera-
ture variations produced by stellar radiation and the 3 Cold, dominated by glaciers and tundra
cold void of space, and might flip regularly between 4-5 Variable cold with temperate places
unendurable heat and near-absolute zero depending 6-8 Temperate, Earthlike in its ranges
on planetary rotation and orbit.

If a GM intends this planet to have a large hu- 9-10 Variable warm, with temperate places
man population they should restrict the possibility of 11 Warm, tropical and hotter in places
a frozen or burning world. Anything that is intolera- 12 Burning, intolerably hot on its surface
ble to a human without a vacc suit means that major 
agriculture is unlikely. As it is effectively impossible to Temperate worlds were the most popular colony 
feed entire planets through limited interstellar trade, sites, and most of the truly populous worlds of the 
every planet needs to support its own population. A frontier have a temperate climate. Many temperate 
world that can’t grow food outside of hydroponic labs worlds have temperature ranges not unlike that of 
or underground farms is unlikely to support millions Earth, though most are canted a little further toward 
of people. cold or heat depending on their angle and proximity 

to the local star.
Types of Climates Temperate worlds are the most likely to teem with 
Frozen worlds are those with so weak a stellar primary native life as well, and to have alien ruins or remains 
or so great a distance that the average temperature is located somewhere on their surface. Most frontier 
close to absolute zero. Any atmosphere that once exist- worlds never accumulated enough population to put a 
ed has long since frozen into drifts of solidified oxygen serious strain on a temperate world’s arable land, but 
or lakes of liquid helium. Exposure to these drifts is this same capaciousness often allows for more com-
very dangerous. Vacc suits maintain a tolerable tem- plicated social divisions to develop. Natives of other 
perature easily because the stellar void is very empty, worlds are often forced to cooperate or die, while those 
and there is little conduction of heat between the suit of a clement temperate world have the luxury of deep 
and empty space. Dunking a suit into a lake of thermal- and lasting divisions.
ly-conductive superchilled liquid can force the heating Warm worlds come in two main flavors, depend-
elements into sudden and drastic overload, draining a ing on the prevalence of water. “Desert worlds” are hot 
power cell in minutes or even seconds. enough or arid enough to be deprived of most surface 

Cold worlds are uncomfortable, but a human can water. Any life on such a planet has to be capable of 
survive on them in nothing more than heavy clothing. extracting water from living prey, air currents or mois-
The worst of the cold worlds are similar in condition ture supplies deep underground. Humans can survive 
to Earth’s Antarctic regions, barren wastes of ice and on warm worlds without more than appropriate cloth-
wind. The more clement ones have brief warmer sea- ing, but desert-world humans must learn sophisticated 
sons or equatorial bands that get enough solar radiation techniques of water prospecting and well-drilling in 
to support substantial agriculture. order to maintain their agricultural systems. Warfare 

On cold worlds, agricultural land is at a premi- often revolves around these water systems.
um. The population is unlikely to be willing to limit its The other common variety of warm world is one 
numbers to what hydroponic farms can provide, and blessed with an abundance of surface water. These 
they may lack the technology for wide-scale artificial worlds tend to be covered with plant and animal life, 
production methods. Savage wars may have broken out teeming with thick jungles and vast mats of sargasso on 
over control of fertile growing regions, and popula- seas that boil with piscids and other alien life analogs. 
tions have perhaps been driven away from the arable These worlds can be quite prosperous for humans if the 
land into the cold zones and a lingering death. native life is edible, but inhabitants are often forced to 

Some worlds retain installations from before the deal with large predators and a vigorously ingenious 
Silence deep within the frozen wastes, ancient bases native ecology of disease. 
and laboratories that were planted in an age when Variable temperature worlds tend to show a greater 
good launch sites and orbital windows meant more distribution of climates than other worlds, either rang-
than trifles of temperature. These lost sites might be ing from cold to temperate levels or temperate to hot 
remembered in legend and story, and some native lead- levels. This may be a climate that changes world-wide 
ers might still be in possession of the automatic defense when a long, slow orbit brings the planet into prox-
bypass codes handed down by their ancestors. imity with a stellar primary, or it might be a world 

that has substantially different climatic zones spread 



Temperature •163 

across its surface. The north pole of one world might 
be a sun-blasted desert that moderates to a cool, wet 
equator, or an icy world might be warmed here and 
there by complex channels of geothermally-heated 
subsurface rivers. Variable temperature worlds tend 
to have savage weather. The mixing of hot and cold 
air can send ferocious cyclones and raging hurricanes 
across the surface of the world, some large enough to 
consume most of a hemisphere. 

Burning worlds are too hot for a human to survive 
without equipment similar to a vacc suit in effective-
ness. Rivulets of molten lead or copper might bleed 
from open veins on the hillsides, and many of the same 
perils that face an explorer on a frozen world have hot-
ter equivalents on a burning one. Ash drifts, pools of 
molten metal, and superheated liquid vents can bring 
quick death to an unwary explorer, and the miners who 
inhabit such worlds must be forever vigilant against the 
perils of their burning home.

Climate and Adventure
Any planet with Burning or Frozen conditions is go-
ing to need some kind of sealed habitat for humanity. 
Worlds of Cold or Warm temperatures are at least hab-
itable outside of their most extreme zones, though icy 
planets might not have much arable land on the outside.

As a consequence, planets with Frozen or Burning 
temperatures tend to have the climate as a backdrop 
rather than something the PCs regularly need to deal 
with. If they’ve landed on such a world’s spaceport, it’s 
probably sealed in some subterranean hangar-cavern 
or domed over by massive civil engineering. The ice 
or flame might be a constant concern of the locals, but 
the PCs aren’t going to have to cope with it unless they 
have to leave the inhabited regions of the planet.

On Burning worlds, this isn’t going to happen very 
often. Any habitat without active climate control is go-
ing to be melted or torched by local conditions in short 
order. There will be no ruins to explore or remnants to 
recover unless they’re somehow fireproof.

The easiest use of a Burning world’s temperature 
is as a threat to the locals or the PCs. If something isn’t 
fixed, or if something is destroyed, or if some place isn’t 
evacuated in time, then things will get intolerably hot. 
There’s usually a grace period of increasing tempera-
ture to help add urgency to the situation and layer on 
potential penalties or dangers as the PCs struggle to 
cope with the situation.

Frozen worlds can be equally lethal if a flood of 
liquid oxygen threatens to sweep through a habitat or 
a cold-brittled vital component breaks down. More 
significantly to PCs, however, frozen worlds tend to 
be much better about preserving ruins and remains. 
The PCs might be forced to deal with the frigid tem-
peratures as they search through an alien structure or 
the icy halls of a dead habitat. Such conditions can lead 
to strict time limits on an expedition before materials 
start to brittle and fail under the relentless chill.



164• Biosphere

Biosphere

Some worlds are highly unlikely to have a biosphere. 2d6 Type
An airless rock, a frozen wasteland, or a world of boil-

2 Remnant biosphere
ing tin all are unlikely to host any sort of life more 
sophisticated than microbes, though the universe has 3 Microbial life forms exist
demonstrated the existence of a few exotic creatures 4-5 No native biosphere
even on seemingly unendurable planets.

6-8 Human-miscible biosphere
The real question of a biosphere is whether or not 

it’s edible. Colonists on a world without edible local life 9-10 Immiscible biosphere
are forced to seed and grow Terran crops, which may 11 Hybrid biosphere
well be outcompeted by native life specifically evolved 12 Engineered biosphere
for this world. Such colonists might well end up starv-
ing amid gardens of alien fruit, unable to digest any of They can also be disasters waiting to happen. Pre-
it. The only benefit of such worlds is the likelihood that tech xenobiologists compiled standardized colonization 
humans are just as poisonous to local life, though many packages of plants, animals, and insect life designed to 
large predators don’t realize that until after they devour expand smoothly and evenly to fill the niches of an un-
some luckless colonist. inhabited world. Not all colonists implemented these 

packages correctly, and some worlds had disasters or 
Types of Biosphere special circumstances that destabilized their efforts. 
Biosphere remnants are the wreckage of a ruined ecol- Some empty worlds are now in a state of constant bi-
ogy. Petrified trees, drifts of preserved bones, forests ological flux as the local ecology strives vainly to find 
of dead plant life; something killed all the life on this some sort of equilibrium between the myriad imported 
planet in the relatively recent past. It may have been the species and their violent struggle.
exercise of a maltech planet-buster weapon, or a mu- More subtly, these worlds can be suddenly and 
tant microbe introduced by human colonists, or some drastically destabilized by the import of some offworld 
volcanic eruption or asteroid impact that plunged the plant or animal. With no strong native ecology to fight 
world into decades of frozen night. off interlopers, the wrong beast or bug can lay waste to 

Any local civilization not sophisticated enough to whole continents. These planets tend to be extremely 
escape the planet likely died when it did. Their ruins paranoid about importation of foreign life forms.
and remains might be found throughout the desolate Human-miscible biospheres are those in which 
wastes, along with more clues as to the cause of the some substantial portion of the native life is biologi-
devastation. cally compatible with human nutritional needs. The 

Microbial life is often the only thing that exists on local plants and animals may not be tasty or terribly 
the more inhospitable planets, yet the wide variety of nourishing, but they can support life without the se-
environments that can accommodate life means that rious importation of Terran crop seeds and livestock.
these little beasts show up in some of the most un- Even the friendlier human-miscible biospheres 
likely places. Some varieties of slime mold have even often lack the wide variety of edibles that evolved on 
managed to evolve on corrosive-atmosphere planets, Earth, and the natives often supplement their stocks 
forming a mucous-like outer shell against the atmo- of local foods with limited Terran agriculture. Exotic 
sphere and then feeding and growing off the chemical foods, spices, and liquors can be worth interstellar im-
byproducts of its erosion. portation to feed the hunger for novelty possessed by 

Microbial life can also be dangerous. While most the elites on these worlds.
alien microbes are unable to infect or harm the radically Unfortunately, the fact that humans can eat some 
different biology of humans, some show enough inge- native life means that it is very likely that some na-
nuity to accomplish even that difficult feat. Rumors of tive life can eat humans as well. Large predators and 
terrible “space plagues” that leave behind only drifting diseases capable of human infection are by no means 
ships and garbled warnings remain a steady staple at uncommon on these worlds, and small colonies can be 
spacer bars throughout the known universe. hard-pressed to survive them.

No native biosphere is occasionally found on even Immiscible biospheres are not friendly to humans. 
the most temperate and otherwise habitable worlds. None of the local plants or animals are edible, and any-
For one reason or another, life simply never evolved thing the colony needs to eat will have to be grown 
on these worlds, leaving them a blank slate for the ag- from Terran stock. Worse, it is common for the pollen 
ricultural and ecological efforts of humans. If the world and other microbial life of these worlds to be highly 
is otherwise amenable to Terran life, such planets can allergenic to humans, requiring the regular use of tai-
be enormously fertile and agriculturally rich. lored antiallergenics to prevent eventual respiratory 

failure or exotic immune-system reactions.



Biosphere •165 

These worlds are exceptionally susceptible to the forming new alliances. Large predators from one world 
temptation of human gengineering. Despite the per- may find themselves subsisting on herds of herbivo-
sistent drawbacks, genetic flaws, and handicaps that hu- rous alien life, while Terran vegetation provides suste-
man gengineering usually introduces in a subject, the nance for large populations of small, furred, insect-like 
desperate need to eat can drive worlds to wholesale grazers. Familiar animals may show seemingly bizarre 
experimentation on their progeny. The resultant al- behavior patterns that have formed in response to local 
tered humans are often able to digest the local food, but conditions, perhaps becoming larger or more aggres-
commonly pay for it in shortened life spans, physical sive, or having been gengineered for compatibility.
disabilities, or an inability to consume Terran food- Engineered biospheres are among the rarest, as 
stuffs. Sometimes the consequences are worse still. they require enormous time and effort on the part of 

Immiscible biospheres produce some of the most a highly advanced civilization. Whatever life exists on 
exotic plants and animals in human space. Unfettered this planet has been extensively altered by an alien race 
by the limits of familiar evolutionary patterns, crea- or by advanced pretech gengineering methods. Some 
tures of bizarre beauty and strange configurations are such worlds are paradise planets, carefully sculpted by 
found on many of these worlds. Many lack the intelli- some fabulously wealthy predecessor to suit their own 
gence to realize that humans are as poisonous to them tastes. Others are living forges, where foodstuffs and 
as they are to humans. refined minerals are produced as byproducts from the 

Hybrid biospheres are a stable intermixing of Ter- basic organic processes of the world’s biosphere.
ran flora and fauna with local life forms. Most such Such worlds tend to be fragile. Many engineered 
worlds have been colonized for centuries before the worlds are dependent upon regular stabilizing work to 
Silence, giving the local ecology time to shake out into prevent genetic drift and adaptations that do not serve 
a relatively stable configuration of Earth-born organ- the creator’s purpose. Without regular pruning and 
isms and native life. The native biology may or may adjustment, engineered biospheres can go badly awry. 
not be miscible with human life, but it is unlikely to be Some end up leaving nothing but genetic wreckage 
particularly hostile in any case, or else the interloping in their wake, while others go wrong in more subtle 
life forms would not have been able to get a foothold ways. Where once the biosphere existed to serve the 
on the planet. inhabitants, a creaking engineered biosphere can leave 

Hybrid biospheres often show strange examples the planet’s population chained to constant repair and 
of symbiosis and adaptation, with plants and animals maintenance efforts just to prevent a planetary collapse.



166• Population

Population

Planetary populations hinge on a world’s habitabili- 2d6 Type
ty. Worlds incapable of growing food on the planet’s 

2 Failed colony
surface are unlikely to have more than a few hundred 
thousand inhabitants at best, and truly inimical worlds 3 Outpost
might be lucky to have a tenth as many. As a rule of 4-5 Fewer than a million inhabitants
thumb, a world ought to have some kind of human 

6-8 Several million inhabitants
habitation on it unless the GM has a specific purpose 
for it in mind. A world untouched by human presence 9-10 Hundreds of millions of inhabitants
can be interesting in many ways, but without elabora- 11 Billions of inhabitants
tion there’s little to distinguish it from the next airless 12 Alien inhabitants
ball of rock.

Humans breed quickly, and will tend to push up permanent structures and local improvements. Many 
against the limits of a world’s capacity to feed and sup- are exiles, malcontents, or others incapable of tolerat-
port them. Some cultures with sufficient tech might ing the world that sent them forth, and it can make for 
rely on contraceptives and birth licensing to ensure a somewhat explosive mix in a young colony. These 
sufficient food for its population, while others might pioneers tend to be very friendly towards visiting 
choose or be forced to leave matters to simple Mal- starships, as they are often dependent upon free trad-
thusian culling. Wars and diseases may also serve as ers and tramp merchants to bring them vital supplies 
a check on population, or in some cases, cultures may or news of the sector.
find themselves so wealthy, self-absorbed and comfort- Some “outposts” are really just the stubborn, per-
able as to voluntarily choose not to reproduce. sistent survivors of a long-failed colonization attempt. 

These cultures can survive for centuries, perpetually 
Population Sizes culled by the dangers of the world until the survivors 
Failed colonies are occasionally found dotting the worlds are little more than one more ragged element of the 
of human space. Some date back to the First Wave of local ecology.
human colonization more than a thousand years ago, Fewer than a million inhabitants are often found on 
while others are more recent efforts that guttered out newly-colonized worlds, or those with limited arable 
under the strains of a colony’s birth. land. This class has the widest range of results, from 

Pirate attacks might have wiped out a young col- societies barely large enough to avoid inbreeding to 
ony, as might a hostile biosphere, alien attack, internal minor worlds of several hundred thousand locals strug-
dissension, disease outbreaks, failure of vital colonial gling against hostile local conditions.
equipment, or any one of a hundred other disasters. For worlds with a very small population, settle-
The ruins of the colony might still have valuable pre- ments tend to be clustered close to one another for 
tech artifacts, however, or colonization deeds autho- mutual support and efficient exploitation of land. The 
rized by neighboring worlds. A few survivors might atmosphere might be something like that of a vil-
even have clung to life in the intervening centuries, lage-dotted countryside, with too few people to support 
maintaining some sort of society in the wreckage of large, specialized cities. The major settlement of the 
their ancestors’ work. planet is usually built around the spaceport.

Outposts are rarely composed of more than a few Politics on planets with so few people tend to be 
hundred or few thousand colonists at the most. Out- very personal in nature. Individual leaders can some-
posts are either very new colonies that have not have times address the entire population of a world at a 
the requisite time to grow or they are uncolonized single meeting, and networks of family, friends, and 
worlds that just happen to have a naval or corporate employees can dominate the local social life. This small 
base on the surface. population combined with limited outside contact can 

Corporate or military outposts aren’t intended to result in somewhat… unusual societies more strongly 
be completely self-sufficient. While large outposts are influenced by a leader’s personal quirks than a more 
often forced to raise their own food supplies, replace- populous planet might be. Some such worlds can grow 
ment personnel, spare parts, and advanced tech must decidedly unhealthy in their customs and traditions.
all be brought in from elsewhere. Such temporary out- Hundreds of thousands of inhabitants make up 
posts are known to find themselves in sudden distress the population of many frontier worlds, usually ones 
when a vital supply ship fails to make its drop or when with adequate supplies of arable land and surface condi-
some local threat proves more than the staff can handle. tions amenable to a human without a vacc suit or filter 

Colonial outposts tend to be better equipped but mask. This level of population is also usually the most 
with less outside backing. Such natives expect to live that a world at TL4 can support using only artificial 
and die on the world, and are more inclined to build hydroponic complexes and sealed agricultural systems, 



Population •167 

so less hospitable planets rarely have more than this abundant. These worlds tend to take a different route, 
many inhabitants. becoming balkanized, conflict-torn planets not unlike 

At a hundred thousand citizens or more, city-states a mid-20th-century Earth. Resource wars are common 
and hub settlements start to form, and some major po- and local politics revolve around byzantine feuds and 
litical divisions might exist beneath the overall plane- ancient slights. Technology on such planets tends to be 
tary government. Regional variations start to become very uneven; it is limited or nonexistent in fields that 
present as towns and smaller settlements start to assert depend on unavailable resources, but the natives often 
their own cultural traits. Young colonies rarely have show remarkable sophistication in making the most of 
much of a framework for resolving these new tensions, what they have available.
and it’s not uncommon for outsiders to end up as cats- Alien civilizations are even rarer than massively hu-
paws for varying factions. man-populated planets, but they can be found in some 

A hundred thousand inhabitants is normally sectors. On these worlds, any human presence is either 
the smallest population that can create spike drive- nonexistent or simply a token contingent of traders and 
equipped starships. Less populous worlds rarely have diplomats. The actual number of aliens may range from 
the broad range of specialists and workers necessary a few tens of thousands to teeming worlds of billions.
to build such ships, even if they possess the necessary Alien civilizations appear to be no more immune 
technical information. Even at this threshold, main- to conflict, disaster, and decadence than that of humans, 
taining any kind of astronautic industry would require and most alien worlds are isolated planets. Some sec-
the determined focus of the entire society. Only at pop- tors were known to be dominated by alien empires be-
ulations of a million-plus inhabitants is there enough fore the Scream, but most inhabited worlds found by 
of an industrial margin to allow for less determined colonial surveyors consisted of indigenous, low-tech 
construction of spike drive starships. sapients who evolved on the world, or else were the 

Millions of inhabitants are found on some of the decaying remnants of a former empire that had fallen 
more populous frontier worlds, those planets with an apart into isolated colonial worlds.
excellent climate and soil for agriculture. These worlds This fate of growth, expansion, colonization, and 
teem with human life compared to most of their neigh- collapse appears to be a very common event in the gal-
bors, and if they have sufficient technological exper- axy. Countless alien ruins and lost deep-space artifacts 
tise to build spike drives, they probably are among the indicate that cycles of growth and decay have been 
significant powers of the sector. The sheer amount going on for millennia, and there is little way to tell 
of labor and expertise they can put into their projects how many alien empires have swept over what is now 
dwarfs the capabilities of less populated worlds. human space before dwindling to rotting worlds and 

Some worlds of this type fail to coalesce under a then empty ruins.
unified planetary government, however, and turn most 
of their attention to intra-planetary quarrels between Population Growth
different nations or city-states. Full-scale planetary Most worlds have reached an equilibrium state with 
wars have been known to break out on such worlds, their current populations. While there may be some 
with some being reduced to burnt-out cinders by some variation, few worlds are likely to increase much with-
maltech weapon or by nuclear attacks against regions out a drastic change in the local conditions.
stripped of their nuke snuffers. For primitive worlds, this limit has been reached 

Billions of inhabitants on a world is a freak occur- in brutally Malthusian fashion. The locals simply can-
rence in most sectors, a circumstance dependent on not support any substantial increase of their numbers, 
almost perfect planetary conditions, a First Wave date and additional population is restricted by widespread 
of colonization, a very large initial colonial expedition, contraceptive use, selective infanticide, or regular 
and a strong cultural imperative for reproduction. bouts of mass starvation. The only way out of this trap 
These worlds have been colonized for almost a thou- is through advanced technology that can overcome 
sand years, and have likely gone through substantial the local resource limitations, after which such worlds 
cultural development and change since their founding. might explode in population over a scant few decades.

Planets with this many inhabitants tend to come For more advanced worlds, this limit tends to be 
in two main varieties. The more common is that of organic to the culture. With sophisticated technolo-
regional hegemon, leveraging its enormous reserves gy to supply abundant entertainment and sustenance, 
of labor and scientific personnel to build hundreds or there is less importance in having offspring to labor 
thousands of starships. Some hegemons might even for the family or nourish its aged members. Individu-
have the transport weight and personnel available to als become more interested in their own pleasures and 
colonize or conquer their less powerful neighbors out- ambitions than in the burdensome work of child-rear-
right, though most hegemons prefer the safer route of ing, and population tends to slope downward until 
docile client states rather than outright conquest. cultural mores reinforce a certain basic minimum of 

Not all such worlds have the necessary resources reproduction. A drastic change in cultural attitudes or 
to build starships, even when the labor is cheap and an increase in societal uncertainty can alter this rapidly.



168• Tech Level

Tech Level

The tech level of a world represents not only the lev- 2d6 Type
el of technological progress and scientific knowledge 

2 TL0, neolithic-level technology
available on it, but also the world’s ability to translate 
that knowledge into effective production. A world 3 TL1, medieval technology
might still guard texts describing elaborate principles 4-5 TL2, early Industrial Age tech
of petrochemical manipulation, but without oil or 

6-8 TL4, modern postech
fossil fuels on the planet they have no way to use the 
information. It is this kind of resource limitation that 9-10 TL3, tech like that of present-day Earth
most often keeps a world caught at a low level of tech. 11 TL4+, postech with specialties
Without bottleneck resources such as petrochemicals 12 TL5, pretech with surviving infrastructure
or radioactives, they can’t develop the technology that 
would allow them to do without such resources. Some worlds might retain crisply rational records 

Tech level 4 is the baseline level of development for of their colonization and downfall. Others might pre-
planets capable of building fusion plants, spike-drive serve tales of a starry origin in legends and story. A few 
equipped starships, limited longevity enhancements, might have forgotten their origins entirely, and view 
and basic energy weapons. A planet without this level sky-born humans as gods or messengers of the divine. 
of development is effectively cut off from interstellar Such awe rarely lasts very long once the merchants or 
news and trade without the good offices of far traders, pirates who landed make their purposes clear.
explorers, or scavenger fleet contacts. Tech level 1 worlds have managed to find and ex-

Tech levels are rough approximations, and every ploit metal deposits and likely have imported or domes-
planet is going to have variance within that range. A ticated beasts of burden. Those worlds with easy access 
decayed colony is unlikely to have forgotten the basics to fossil fuels or a similarly energy-dense substance can 
of human anatomy and practical wound care, but they advance to greater things, but a culture trapped at TL1 
may not have the local resources to fashion medical is unlikely to have access to such helpful resources. A 
tools more sophisticated than obsidian scalpels and few worlds have enough usable plant matter or other 
herbal poultices. By the same token, a primitive world combustibles to make steam engines feasible, but those 
might have local resources that are exceptionally useful with very much of such a resource usually make the 
in one or two narrow ranges of technology. leap to the next tech level eventually.

As a consequence, tech level 1 worlds tend to be 
Planetary Tech Levels caught at much the same general level of development 
Tech level 0 represents a world with technologies simi- as their tech level 0 cousins. They may have elaborate 
lar to neolithic-era humanity. Very few worlds collapse social structures and cultural development, but they 
this far without dying out completely, and so a world are unable to mechanize without some energy-dense 
this primitive is very rare in human space. The world resource to serve as fuel. The scavenged hulks of their 
is so profoundly devoid of useful resources that the ancestors’ fusion plants may stand as mute temples to 
natives may simply not have anything better to work the achievements of their forebears, but without the 
with than rocks and native vegetation. tech necessary to repair and rebuild such edifices the 

Natives of a world at this tech level might retain world is dependent on purely local fuel sources.
elaborate cultural artifacts and a very sophisticated Tech level 1 worlds tend to respond to visitors in 
society. Existing resources tend to be exploited to the much the same way as tech level 0 planets. The ruling 
hilt, with large populations producing massive stone class of these worlds is liable to be able to muster larger 
cities, human-powered engines for irrigation, and vast cities, bigger armies, and all the other perquisites that 
displays of foodstuffs and craft work for the ruling class. come from being able to work the available agricultural 
Despite this, the lack of metal, domesticated beasts of land with fewer hands.
burden, and petrochemicals puts a hard stop on the Tech level 2 worlds are blessed with the presence of 
technological development of most of these worlds. fossil fuels or a feasibly abundant biofuel source. Inter-

Responses to far traders and other interstellar nal combustion engines are crude things compared to 
travelers will vary with the local culture. The lack of the power of a fusion plant, but they can be built with 
quick communications methods tends to result in large primitive tools and a basic degree of education. The 
populations breaking up into numerous smaller re- mechanization that results from this resource vastly 
gional cultures, and the friendly prince of one domain increases the efficiency of local farming, the speed of 
might neighbor an implacably hostile sage-king. Most travel, and the productivity of factory workers.

“lostworlders” have a keen appreciation for the benefits Most tech level 2 worlds are “knockdowns”; plan-
these strangers from the sky can bring them, and will ets that once had a much higher degree of sophisti-
bargain accordingly. cation but were recently crippled by disease, disaster, 



Tech Level •169 

or invasion. The natives tend to be keenly aware of to produce results without severe drawbacks, but some 
the glories of former generations, and work fiercely to such worlds remain populated by altered humanity 
redevelop lost techniques and reclaim old knowledge. designed to cope with local conditions more perfectly 

Few tech level 2 worlds produce much that’s worth than baseline humans.
interstellar trade. Most foodstuffs are too bulky and Most worlds with regular interstellar contact and 
cheap to make it worth a captain’s time. Some worlds the necessary raw resources eventually gravitate to-
have rare ore deposits, but the natives have no reason wards this level of technological expertise. It may take 
to dig them until a merchant makes it worth their while decades, or even centuries in the case of more retro-
to set up a whole new industry for export. Some such grade worlds, but this tech level is the highest that can 
worlds barter the relics of their ancestors in exchange readily be achieved by most planets.
for educational materials or rare resources necessary Tech level 4 with specialties is an unusual case of 
for advancing local industry. Others feel forced to trade a normal tech level 4 world that has retained some 
native work contracts for dangerous, dirty labor in a pretech industries or has developed their own local 
bargain that’s little different from slave trading. technical expertise beyond baseline postech in certain 

Tech level 3 worlds are those that have developed specific fields.
to a level much like that of the more advanced nations Most such specialties are relatively narrow in 
of late twentieth-century Earth. The main difference scope; grav tech, medicine, hydroponics, force field 
between tech level 3 worlds and level 4 worlds is the generation, or some field of roughly similar breadth. 
lack of fusion power or spike drive manufacture. These specialties are usually either the product of a 

These worlds come in two major varieties. The few irreplaceable pretech manufactories or the result 
first is a “knockdown” world that formerly had tech of some unique local resource that serves amazingly 
level 4 technologies before some catastrophe or pirate well for the purpose at hand. In both cases, the world 
attack destroyed their knowledge and industrial base. will jealously guard the tech, and much local conflict 
Some of the wrecked infrastructure might have been may relate to control over these resources.
irreplaceable, and the world must struggle to regain its These worlds tend to have substantial amounts of 
former level of technological production. Worlds in interstellar trade from neighboring worlds interested 
this condition tend to have rather small populations in their tech. The ruling elite of the world can be os-
that are susceptible to the loss of a few concentrated tentatious about display of this wealth.
groups of experts. Tech level 5 is the highest tech level that might 

The second major variety is a world that suffered merit random placement. A world with this level of 
a severe disaster shortly after colonization and has technological expertise has somehow managed to 
been forced to painstakingly build up their technolog- hold on to the majority of the pre-Scream technology 
ical base ever since. Some of these worlds date back to base, and can produce a wide range of goods that are 
the First Wave of colonization a thousand years ago, unknown on less sophisticated worlds. Miniaturized 
driven into near-neolithic conditions by some outside fusion plants, drive-6 rated spike drives, exotic grav 
pressure before slowly and painfully rebuilding their weaponry, and even the development of psionics-based 
technological base through purely indigenous efforts. “psitech” is possible on such a world.
These worlds tend to have very large populations if the Pretech manufacturing was largely dependent on 
world’s climate permits, as they have been colonized for specially-trained industrial psychics. With the loss of 
quite some time. their unique disciplines in the Scream, most worlds 

Simply providing a world with the necessary tech- that retain this level of tech classification were forced 
nical data for advancement doesn’t mean that advance- to substitute slower, less precise methods that sharply 
ment will be quick or even. Even if a tech level 3 world curtailed their production efficiency. Barring the pro-
has the necessary resources to build tech level 4 devices, foundly unlikely happenstance of this world’s redevel-
it may take as much as a generation for a world to build opment of the lost disciplines, their maximum indus-
the necessary infrastructure and resource extraction trial output is sharply limited. Even on worlds such as 
enterprises. The time may be longer still if the domi- this, most technology is likely mass-produced postech, 
nant cultures are uneasy with the new technology. with only important goods produced to pretech levels 

Tech level 4 worlds are the most common in hu- of quality.
man space, and their technical expertise is the baseline A world with this level of technology is almost 
for modern post-Silence “postech”. These worlds can certainly a regional hegemon, one of the most pow-
create spike drives rated up to drive-3, fusion pow- erful and influential worlds in the sector. Even those 
er plants, grav vehicles, simple energy weapons, and worlds that have no imperial ambitions have enormous 
medicines that extend human life to a hundred years of influence simply through the vast superiority of their 
vigorous good health. They can manage sophisticated starships and military technology.
gengineering on simple life forms, and some tech level 
4 worlds have even attempted to improve the genetic 
structures of human life itself. These attempts have yet 



170• System Points of Interest

Additional System Points of Interest

The world you’re creating is the most interesting or 
important place in this solar system, but it may not be Other Points of Interest
the only one. If you wish, you can decorate the system Aside from other inhabited planets, a system can con-
with other points of interest worth PC attention. You tain a number of other settlements or stations that 
might do this at the same time you roll up the system’s could draw PC attention. Most of the time these sta-
primary world, or you could wait until it becomes a tions can simply be assumed; a TL4 world is going to 
significant point in play. have asteroid mines and refueling stations and listening 

posts, and most of these locations have no importance 
Adding Other Worlds to the game until the PCs go looking for them.
For simplicity’s sake, it’s often best to just stick with Other times, however, you’ll want to pre-seed the 
one inhabited world. The original colonists would have system with a few interesting locations. The adjacent 
chosen the most human-habitable planet in the system, table offers a number of different possibilities to roll 
and unless they grew dramatically in the time before or choose from.
the Scream they wouldn’t have had reason to colonize Most of the points are intended to be remote 
less favorable planets before the catastrophe knocked outposts of the primary world. They might be deep-
out their spaceflight capabilities. Other rocks might be space research stations, refueling stations on the edge 
floating in the system, but they’re probably barren and of the system, bases on isolated gas-giant moons that 
uninhabited. have valuable resources, or other far-flung tendrils of 

If you do decide to add additional inhabited planets a greater civilization.
to the system, you can generate them normally, but Some of these points could be more independent 
you’ll want to ask yourself a few special questions. The establishments. A deep-space existence can be made 
table below offers some ideas for potential answers. largely self-sustaining with TL4 engineering, though 

First, what is the origin of the world, and how does the life there is likely primitive and tenuous. With 
it relate to the primary world in the system? Knowing enough cobbled-together defenses and a lack of any-
where this secondary planet’s inhabitants came from thing particularly worth stealing, exile groups, recluses, 
can often give you answers to a host of other questions. and other antisocial sorts can make themselves a pri-

Second, how do they feel about the primary world? vate domain that no local planet cares about enough to 
If you generate three or more worlds, you’ll want to commit the resources required to destroy it.
decide how each of them feels about the other. This Others among these remote stations become out-
feeling may not necessarily be reciprocal. posts for pirates and other reavers, usually operating 

Third, what’s the major point of contact between under some deniable cover or protected by enough 
them and the primary world? If the two are on a friend- defensive installations to dissuade anything short of a 
ly basis, this contact might be something that benefits major military assault. The calculus for these robbers 
them both, while a more hostile relationship could is simple; the effort a planetary navy would have to 
make it a point they’re fighting over or otherwise make to get rid of them must be more than the cost of 
struggling to maintain dominance in. In the case of a tolerating their depredations.
mutual threat, it might be something both are facing Few of these anarchic outposts last for very long. 
with a united front, or it could be the two are struggling The stronger and more active they become, the more 
to see who gets thrown to the wolves first. pressing it is for their victims to take steps to disperse 

With these three answers in hand you’ll be able them. Barring some pirate king both charismatic and 
to flesh out this second planet more easily, adding in foolhardy, most such outposts are primed for quick 
elements from the primary world as needed. abandonment when a fleet shows up on the sensors.

d8 Origin of the World Current Relationship Contact Point

1 Recent colony from the primary world Confirmed hatred of each other Trade in vital goods
2 Refuge for exiles from primary Active cold war between them Shared religion
3 Founded ages ago by a different group Old grudges or resentments Mutual language
4 Founded long before the primary world Cultural disgust and avoidance Entertainment content
5 Lost ancient colony of the primary Polite interchange and trade Shared research
6 Colony recently torn free of the primary Cultural admiration for primary Threat to both of them
7 Long-standing cooperative colony world Long-standing friendship Shared elite families
8 Recent interstellar colony from elsewhere Unflinching mutual loyalty Exploiting shared resource



System Points of Interest •171 

d8 A point… d10 …occupied by… d10 …with this situation.

1 Deep-space station 1-2 Dangerously odd transhumans 1-2 Systems breaking down
3-4 Freeze-dried ancient corpses 3-4 Foreign sabotage attempt
5-6 Secretive military observers 5-6 Black market for the elite
7-8 Eccentric oligarch and minions 7-8 Vault for dangerous pretech
9-0 Deranged but brilliant scientist 9-0 Supply base for pirates

2 Asteroid base 1-2 Zealous religious sectarians 1-2 Life support is threatened
3-4 Failed rebels from another world 3-4 Base needs a new asteroid
5-6 Wage-slave corporate miners 5-6 Dug out something nasty
7-8 Independent asteroid prospectors 7-8 Fighting another asteroid
9-0 Pirates masquerading as otherwise 9-0 Hit a priceless vein of ore

3 Remote moon base 1-2 Unlucky corporate researchers 1-2 Something dark has awoken
3-4 Reclusive hermit genius 3-4 Criminals trying to take over
5-6 Remnants of a failed colony 5-6 Moon plague breaking out
7-8 Military listening post 7-8 Desperate for vital supplies
9-0 Lonely overseers and robot miners 9-0 Rich but badly-protected

4 Ancient orbital ruin 1-2 Robots of dubious sentience 1-2 Trying to stop it awakening
3-4 Trigger-happy scavengers 3-4 Meddling with strange tech
5-6 Government researchers 5-6 Impending tech calamity
7-8 Military quarantine enforcers 7-8 A terrible secret is unearthed
9-0 Heirs of the original alien builders 9-0 Fighting outside interlopers

5 Research base 1-2 Experiments that have gotten loose 1-2 Perilous research underway
3-4 Scientists from a major local corp 3-4 Hideously immoral research
5-6 Black-ops governmental researchers 5-6 Held hostage by outsiders
7-8 Secret employees of a foreign power 7-8 Science monsters run amok
9-0 Aliens studying the human locals 9-0 Selling black-market tech

6 Asteroid belt 1-2 Grizzled belter mine laborers 1-2 Ruptured rock released a peril
3-4 Ancient automated guardian drones 3-4 Foreign spy ships hide there
5-6 Survivors of destroyed asteroid base 5-6 Gold rush for new minerals
7-8 Pirates hiding out among the rocks 7-8 Ancient ruins dot the rocks
9-0 Lonely military patrol base staff 9-0 War between rival rocks

7 Gas giant mine 1-2 Miserable gas-miner slaves or serfs 1-2 Things are emerging below
3-4 Strange robots and their overseers 3-4 They need vital supplies
5-6 Scientists studying the alien life 5-6 The workers are in revolt
7-8 Scrappers in the ruined old mine 7-8 Pirates secretly fuel there
9-0 Impoverished separatist group 9-0 Alien remnants were found

8 Refueling station 1-2 Half-crazed hermit caretaker 1-2 A ship is in severe distress
3-4 Sordid purveyors of decadent fun 3-4 Pirates have taken over
5-6 Extortionate corporate minions 5-6 Has corrupt customs agents
7-8 Religious missionaries to travelers 7-8 Foreign saboteurs are active
9-0 Brainless automated vendors 9-0 Deep-space alien signal






ADVENTURE CREATION
After developing one or more worlds, a GM ought to Sometimes, however, the players ask for some-
have a fairly substantial list of Friends, Enemies, Places, thing you know is going to be impossible, or some-
Complications, and Things appropriate to a given plan- thing that you know will be rapidly reconsidered by 
et. An experienced GM may well be able to assemble the group. Maybe the nemesis has fled into the bowels 
an interesting adventure out of these pieces, but even of an ultra-high-security orbital citadel, or you know 
the most practiced designer might be hard-pressed to that the duke is actually dying of biopsionic cancer and 
come up with enough interesting setups to fill out an will be dead in a few more days. If the information is 
entire sector. available to the PCs, you can point this out to them 

The method that follows is by no means the best and let them reconsider their goals. They might give 
or only way to devise an adventure, but it’s a procedure up on pursuing the nemesis, for example, or change 
that will do the job for a working GM. This method their goal to that of finding some way to penetrate the 
work best if you’ve already generated a world using defenses around the orbital station. It’s important not 
the tools in the Sector Creation chapter, but the basic to completely shut down impractical plans, but instead 
outlines can function even without such support. suggest alternate routes that might turn “impossible” 

into merely “very difficult”.
Identify Your Needs Be willing to follow the players’ lead on alternate 
The first step in creating an adventure is identifying routes. If there’s not a compelling reason to shoot down 
what, precisely, you need the adventure to do. If you’ve an idea or assumption about the world, run with it. If 
been following the recommended pattern for running they ask if there are rebels or traitors or spy networks 
your campaign, the last session ended with you asking they might be able to contact to get the information 
the players what goal they wanted to pursue next time. they need to crack the defenses, then tell them yes. If 
If this is for the first adventure to kick off a campaign, the players are going to be kind enough to map out 
you might need something that introduces the players your adventure creation needs for you, let them do the 
to the setting and gives them a short adventure to get work unless there’s a very good reason otherwise.
them working together smoothly. If you’re creating Other times, however, the players don’t have the 
backup content that you can deploy rapidly when the information they’d need to realize that their intentions 
players catch you off guard, then that might be a third are impractical. You know they’re going to get ten min-
sort of purpose behind your work. Whatever it is, you utes into the next session before they realize that what 
need to keep this basic goal in mind as you create the they planned to do is totally impossible. You can’t write 
adventure content. Adventures are created to be play- them an adventure that gives them a chance of succeed-
able content at the table, so it needs to work for you. ing at the goal, not without violating common sense or 

Often, players are somewhat equivocal when they already-established game world facts, so what do you 
tell you what sort of effort they plan to make for the do in such situations? There are two general ways to 
next session. Sometimes their intentions will be clear handle this: anticipate their next course of action, or 
and direct, such as pursuing a nemesis who got away prepare filler content. 
from them last time with a cargo hold full of alien arti- There are times when you can tell that the players 
facts. Other times, it will be something more nebulous, are going to hit the obstacle and immediately look for 
like “Find a good deal on cargo for our ship” or “Explore a way around it. Maybe they discover the nemesis has 
some of the alien ruins you mentioned were on this fled to the orbital at the start of the next adventure, 
world”, or “Do something really unkind to the planetary but a convenient NPC suggests that there’s a way to 
duke who shot down our starship”. get the passcodes onto the station if the PCs are able 

When things are clear, you’ll have an easy time to contact a certain information broker. You write the 
creating an adventure. If they’re chasing the nemesis, adventure to help you handle the PCs’ attempts to find 
you know you need to create an adventure revolving and convince the broker to help them, because you’re 
around them pursuing this evildoer and encountering confident that the group isn’t going to just shrug and 
plausible challenges on the way. If the guidance you’ve let the nemesis go.
been given is less precise, more of the details are up to On other occasions, however, you don’t have that 
you. You might create an adventure about a “bargain” confidence. You really aren’t sure what the PCs will de-
cargo deal that threatens to go very bad, or draw up an cide to do when they see their initial goal is impractical. 
alien ruin for them to explore, or introduce a plucky In this case, you write some filler content, designed to 
band of anti-ducal rebels for the PCs to encounter, give the players something fun to do for the session 
along with the problems those rebels have. So long as while they figure out their next plan. This sort of filler 
what you’re making is logically connected to what they content can often be written far in advance of its actual 
want from you, you’ll be able to deliver a fine time at need, and over the course of a long campaign it’s likely 
the table. you’ll end up with several sessions worth of this prep 



174• Adventure Creation

work kept ready in your GM folder, available for de- Assemble the Outline
ployment whenever the PCs start doing things you’re With the adventure ingredients in hand, it’s time to put 
not prepared to handle yet. This section will include together the basic outline of the adventure. An outline 
some specific advice on how to build this kind of filler isn’t meant to fill in every detail and supply every fact 
content and how to insert it into play. you need to run the adventure, but merely to give you 

In the end, the goal at this stage is to have a clear a basic idea of the adventure’s premise and point out 
idea of what sort of content you need to have prepped the kind of information you’ll need to prepare for play.
for the next session. Once you know what kind of ma- If you’re pressed for time and don’t feel like as-
terial you need to make, you can go on to the next stage. sembling your own outline, flip forward in this section 

to a list of one hundred plot seeds. Take your Friends, 
Choose Ingredients Enemies, Complications, and other world elements and 
The next step in creating the adventure is to look back slot them into a seed that looks appropriate to your 
at your sector information and the tags and elements needs. You now have your outline and can skip to the 
you’ve rolled up for the planet the PCs are on. You’ve next step in creating the adventure.
already created some NPCs, complications, and places If you’d rather spend more time developing the 
to work with, so now’s your chance to take advantage outline, you’ll want to pick three basic elements to 
of your preparations. If the PCs are somewhere that make up its essential frame. Not every adventure in-
hasn’t had that work done already, take a moment to volves all three elements, but usually you’ll need rep-
fabricate an appropriate Friend, Enemy, Complication, resentative examples of each. You’ll need a Problem to 
Thing, and Place suitable for the setting. You’ll use these drive the adventure, a Person to serve as an antagonist 
ingredients to create the adventure in the next step. or point of entry to the Problem, and you’ll need a Place 

While you can pull the ingredients directly from to set the events as they play out.
your sector file, you can also take a moment to custom- Your Problem is the core of your adventure, and 
ize them to the situation. Maybe there’s a particular is an unstable or untenable situation that the PCs can 
NPC you know is going to show up next time, given meaningfully affect. The players aren’t going to care 
the party’s ambitions, or there’s a specific macguffin about problems so big or so intractable that their ac-
that’s in circulation right now. You can adjust these tions won’t have any consequential effect. They’re 
ingredients to fit the specific circumstances and help going to be engaged with problems small enough, or 
smooth transitions between adventures. The same peo- specific enough, that they feel that their choices can 
ple can keep showing up when it’s logical that they’d really change the outcome.
be involved, and the other elements can persist to help Some Problems are self-attractive to the players. If 
give a sense of continuity to events. the party wants to explore an alien ruin on this world, 

It’s also useful to pull in regular callbacks from then simply putting an unexplored alien art museum 
prior adventures. The things that PCs do have conse- where they can get at it will be enticement enough. The 
quences, and sometimes those consequences persist for Problem is that the PCs want what’s inside the muse-
quite some time. Try to put at least one callback to prior um, but there are some dangers or difficulties that are 
events or people into each adventure, even if it’s just a preventing them from plundering its age-old secrets. 
cameo from an NPC, or a newsflash giving up-to-date Your job in that case will be to make the overcoming of 
reporting on some situation the PCs were involved in. those difficulties interesting enough to satisfy the play-
The more that the PCs feel like they’re really making ers. Whenever you have a situation where the players 
a difference in the campaign world, the more engaged want X, your Problem can simply consist of placing X 
they’re going to be with the setting. and then making it plausibly difficult to get to.

Try to make sure that the ingredients you use are Other times, this isn’t going to be enough. Perhaps, 
logical and coherent elements of your campaign setting. the planet’s savage water barons are locked in a bloody 
Pulling antagonists or macguffins from the starry void struggle over control of the ancient Mandate-era hy-
can be convenient, but an ingredient that just comes droforming installation, control of which will leave 
out of nowhere, with no foreshadowing or visible con- one of them the undisputed master of the arid world. 
nection to the rest of the campaign, is an ingredient Certainly, the services of a small band of recklessly cou-
that some groups might find jarring and difficult to rageous adventurers could be vital in penetrating the 
interact with. In the absence of some visible connec- installation’s automatic defenses, but why should the 
tion to the rest of the campaign, it’s hard for a party players care which tattooed savage gets to be master?
to get their hands around an ingredient and deduce The Person is your way of connecting the players 
intelligent, rational ways to interact with it. A planetary with the Problem, when the Problem is not one that 
tyrant they’ve known about for a few sessions is much naturally attracts their interest. The Person provides 
easier to deal with than an alien overlord fresh out of the human connection between the party and the sit-
drillspace, because the tyrant is part of a setting and uation, either through being a sympathetic figure who 
context they’ve had a chance to understand. appeals to the group’s desire to help, or through being 

a dangerous antagonist who forces a response.



Adventure Creation •175 

Of course, an adventure can involve more than Fleshing It Out
one important NPC, and the players might end up with You know the basic outline of the adventure, so this 
multiple reasons to engage with the Problem. But by stage is where you add the extra information you need 
focusing on at least one important Person, you make to actually play it out at the table. Some GMs need very 
sure that the players have a real reason to care about little of this, and can improvise an evening’s play out 
the Problem and provide yourself with a contact point of nothing more than an outline and a few sketched 
through which to pass on information about the situ- notes. Most GMs require a little more preparation to 
ation. Even an antagonist can serve as a useful chance be comfortable with running an adventure. As you go 
to dump setting info on the players and clue them in through this process, let your own comfort level be 
to adventure opportunities. A blood-distilling water your guide on how detailed and elaborate your prepa-
baron who wipes out a sand village that helped the ration work should be, but make sure to cover the basic, 
party in an earlier adventure informs the players not critical parts of the adventure first before you spend 
only that the water barons exist on the world, but that time detailing contingencies and what-ifs.
this particular vampire warlord is on his way to seize To start the process, ask yourself the following 
the hydroforming station. questions to determine what sort of preparation work 

At this stage, pick one Person to be the connec- you need to do.
tion between the Problem and getting the PCs directly What maps do I need? If you expect the PCs to 
involved. Give them a name and a sentence or so de- assault a location, you’re going to need a map good 
scribing how they’re going to pull the PCs in, but don’t enough to support that. You can pull something close 
worry about fleshing them out further at this point. off the web, scribble in any tweaks needed for your ad-
You might add additional people to the mix if you know venture, and use it accordingly. Maybe the abandoned 
there are certain other NPCs you want to involve in the missile silo plans you’ve downloaded are actually being 
situation, but you can delay this to the next step. used as a hidey-hole for a rebel leader, but all it takes 

Finally, you need to choose a Place where this ad- is a few coats of GM paint and the players won’t know 
venture is going to take place. Some sessions will occur the difference.
in multiple Places, with the heroes gallivanting around The more carefully and intently the PCs are going 
the planet or solar system to deal with the Problem in to be interacting with a site, the more you’re going to 
multiple locations, but every adventure needs at least need a map for it. A tense political meeting that takes 
one Place to contain the action. place on some orbital resort station might not need a 

Sometimes the Place itself is the focus of the ac- map at all if the focus is around the politics of it. If you 
tion. If the PCs are looting an alien art museum, then know a terrorist group is going to bomb the talks and 
the museum itself is going to be the major element of try to assassinate the diplomats, however, then you’re 
importance in the adventure. You’re going to have to going to need enough of a map to support the PCs’ in-
make it a sufficiently interesting, complex, and engag- evitable attempts to foil or escape the bloodshed.
ing location to support a full session’s adventure. What places do I need to make interesting? This is 

Other times, the Place is just a backdrop to the ac- a special case that you’ll run into when the adventure 
tion. A Problem involving tribal warfare in the steam- involves exploring a site. A simple diagram of a loca-
ing xeno-jungles of some gas giant moon might have tion is all you need to run a firefight there, but when 
the terrain be a factor in things, but the jungle itself the thrust of the adventure involves plumbing the un-
is not expected to be interesting enough to keep the known mysteries of a site, there better be some half-
players occupied with no further action. In these situ- way-decent mysteries there to plumb. There should be 
ations, the Place informs and shapes the Problem and perilous dangers, satisfying rewards, and interesting 
gives color and flavor to events, but you don’t have to gubbins to manipulate in the place, elements informed 
build it out into playable content by itself. by the map’s nature and origins. If the PCs are explor-

For now, define the Place that contains the Prob- ing a Chittik hive-station, they ought to be finding 
lem and make sure they’re connected in some way. things that make sense in the context of a man-eating 
Even if the Place is just giving flavor and style cues to alien beetle home, while an abandoned Mandate con-
the Problem, it should be clear to the players that what- trol center should be full of the dusty relics of that lost 
ever is going on here is a thing that is going on in this star-spanning human empire.
particular Place. Make the tribal warfare the kind that The art of creating an interesting site to explore is 
would occur in a jungle, with swift canoes fashioned of worth a book in itself, but the tools later in this chapter 
giant beetle shells and ambushes that take advantage of can help give you some ideas. Another useful source of 
the perils of the alien jungle. The more the Place affects inspiration exists in countless old-school fantasy ad-
what is happening, the more it matters to the game. venture modules; just dig through them for interest-

Once you’ve chosen a Problem to deal with, a ing setpieces, reskin them as super-science, and flavor 
Person to connect the party with the situation, and a them with the style of whatever place they’re in. Never 
Place where all of this is going to unfold, you’re ready hesitate to plunder existing content for your game. You 
to move on to the next step in creating your adventure. are but one GM, and your time and effort are finite.



176• Adventure Creation

What NPCs will I need to detail? When you detail an dering an alien treasure-house, what exactly are they 
NPC, you give them a hook, a motivation, a want, and going to find there? If they save the desert community, 
a power. The hook is simply some visual or behavioral what kind of help or reward do they receive? Is there 
detail that will help them stick in the players’ memo- some way that solving this Problem will advance a PC’s 
ry. Reeking cigars, chrome-plated fingers, a habit of personal goals? Sometimes the reward of a situation is 
finishing every sentence with ’you think?’, or any oth- simply avoiding some terrible outcome, but too many 
er unique detail can help the players remember them of these charity jobs or self-defense adventures can 
when a name might slide off their recollections. These leave the players feeling like chumps.
hooks also give you a hint for descriptive detail when Determining the rewards in experience points, 
you’re playing out an encounter with the PCs. cash, or plunder can be delicate, so there’s a separate 

A motivation is simply that; what the NPC wants section in this chapter devoted to helping you do just 
from life, what immediate goal or ambition they have. that. Your choice will depend largely on how quickly 
Often, this is related to the Problem; the NPC wants you want the PCs to advance in personal power and 
a particular outcome from the situation. Sometimes how plausible it is that a given situation might offer a 
this is a broader life goal, like the desire for vast wealth, considerable reward.
or a particular person’s love, or revenge on an enemy. Lastly, how will the PCs get involved? You’ve got a 
A want is what they want specifically from the PCs. Person to hook them in, or the Problem itself is at-
Usually this is something that helps them achieve their tractive to the PCs, but how exactly are you going to 
motivation, some assistance the PCs can give or action connect the players to the adventure? Figure out the 
they can take that will further the NPC’s motivation. details of how you’re going to introduce the adven-
A power is what they can do to help or harm the PCs, ture to the players and take note of the information, 
whether that consists of giving vital info, exerting their resources, and situation they’ll encounter when they 
influence for or against the PCs, or simply the threat step into the scenario.
of their physical violence against the party. An NPC’s 
power is why the PCs should care about their want. Polish It Up

Give the NPC combat statistics at this point if you You’re almost finished with your adventure. All you 
think it likely they’re going to get in a fight. Remember need to do now is put yourself in your party’s shoes 
that most people in the galaxy are normal human be- and think about how they’re likely to experience the 
ings with no unique combat prowess. Just because an adventure. You know your players better than any 
NPC is the president of a megacorp doesn’t necessarily author could, so you know the ways they’re likely to 
mean he’s got more than 1 hit die, especially if he’s react to NPCs, how they like to deal with problems, 
led a life otherwise insulated from physical danger and and what sort of things make them sympathetic or an-
threats to his life. gry. Don’t worry about some platonic Ideal Adventurer 

What default outcomes will you need to establish? when you’re doing a mental walkthrough of the adven-
In an unstable situation, it’s assumed that events will ture. Worry about the people you know are going to 
shake out a certain way if the PCs don’t get involved, be playing this.
or don’t try to redirect events a particular way. Take If you’ve created a sandbox-style adventure with 
a moment to decide what’s going to happen in the ad- the steps above, there won’t be any written-out “path” 
venture if the players don’t change things. How will through the adventure. You’ll have a situation, some 
the situation resolve itself, and what will happen to the NPCs, and the resources you need to handle the players 
NPCs involved? If there’s a particular timeline to the interacting with that situation. Maybe they’ll resolve 
adventure, when certain things will happen at certain it to their liking, and maybe they’ll end the session by 
times, note it down. booking a fast ship offplanet with a furious mob at their 

If the adventure is especially time-sensitive, make heels. Your only concern at this stage is making sure 
sure the PCs are given adequate warning about it. the adventure is logical, approachable, and engaging.
While the party might reasonably be expected to under- Is the adventure logical? If your adventure is con-
stand that a tribal assault on a fortified desert commu- tradicting facts that have already been established about 
nity isn’t going to continue forever, if the town is going the world, the players are going to want to see a good 
to collapse in three hours then they need to know that reason for it. If they break into a slum warehouse to 
every minute counts. Let NPCs warn them of the dwin- find it full of elite special-ops combatants, they’re going 
dling resistance, let the enemies make visible progress to want a very good explanation for such a seeming-
toward success, and otherwise ensure that the natural ly-irrational encounter. They don’t have to see every 
warnings inherent in the situation are properly passed explanation or understand every dramatic deviation 
on to the players. They can’t realize how serious a situa- from reasonable expectations, but you should know 
tion is if the GM won’t tell them what their PCs can see. these reasons, and the players should be confident that 

What are the rewards to dealing with the Problem? the reasons exist.
You need to figure out what exactly the PCs are sup- If you design an adventure by “story logic”, where 
posed to be getting out of their efforts. If they’re plun- the most important thing is maintaining a genre feel 



Adventure Creation •177 

and good adventure pacing, the players are going to ing with their phones, talking about extraneous mat-
react in story-logical ways. When presented with an ters, or just doing something else in-game. Even if the 
obstacle, they’re going to assume that their heroes are PCs have a logical reason to care about the adventure, 
expected to have a reasonable chance to overcome if the players are not invested, they aren’t going to have 
that obstacle. When faced with a dangerous combat a very good time.
foe, they’re going to assume the enemy is at least the- To build engagement, use elements your players 
oretically beatable by the group, and when encounter- love and elements your players hate. What do your 
ing a seemingly-invincible challenge, they’re going to players really like? What kind of NPCs, situations, and 
look around for the right story levers to pull to make activities do they really enjoy? Don’t worry about ab-
it somewhat more vincible. This style of running a stract players, just think about the specific people you 
game is perfectly valid, and it is indeed preferable for are playing with. Conversely, what kind of villains do 
groups that want to maintain a certain genre feel, but they absolutely despise? What sort of evildoing gets 
it’s not usually how Stars Without Number adventures them fired up with righteous wrath? It’s important 
get made. not to push things into gratuitous grimdark, but if you 

The default Stars Without Number assumption is have some players who really hate slavers, then that’s 
that adventures operate on established setting logic. If a good cue to make beating down slavers an element 
something should be somewhere, it is, whether or not in an adventure.
the PCs can hope to overcome it. If an ally is locked Once you’ve polished up the adventure, done a 
away in the bowels of a max-security prison, the PCs mental walk-through of events, and ensured that it is 
might simply not have any reasonable way to get them logical, approachable, and engaging, then you’re ready 
out unless they can change the situation through sup- to play.
plemental adventures. When the PCs see a terrifyingly 
dangerous foe, that foe really is terrifyingly dangerous, Creating Filler Adventures
and some PCs are almost certainly going to die if they Sometimes a GM gets caught flat-footed by the players. 
decide to fight. The PCs have no cosmic authorial pro- They do something or choose a goal that the GM is 
tection, and if they put themselves in no-win situations, totally unprepared to manage. A GM is well within 
they are going to lose. their rights to call a pause and explain to the players 

With that in mind, look at your adventure and that they’re just not ready to handle that yet, and if the 
make sure it is not the sort of challenge or situation players want to do it, they can do it next session, after 
that would only be essayed by someone convinced that the GM has had time to prep something for it.
they are the first-book protagonist of a sci-fi trilogy. Other times, however, the GM will just throw in 
Don’t expect the PCs to do unreasonable things or face a quick filler adventure. These are adventures built ex-
ridiculous obstacles just because they’re part of the ad- pressly for running when the GM is caught by surprise 
venture. A canny player group will make a point of or runs out of prepared content for the evening. Filler 
avoiding unjustified perils and staying well clear of un- adventures are built much like any other adventure, but 
beatable difficulties. They won’t bite on your adventure their priorities are different. Filler adventures should 
if it seems a fast-track journey to an unmarked grave. be insistent, short, and simple.

Is the adventure approachable? This has to do with The adventure needs to be insistent; it needs to 
your hook and the overall appeal of the situation. What present a situation that the PCs absolutely must deal 
is it about this situation that’s going to pique player with right this minute. A terrorist attack, a criminal 
interest? Knowing what you know about your players, stealing a PC macguffin, a friend frantically calling for 
is this the sort of thing they’re going to jump into? Even help… the adventure needs to grab the PCs and distract 
if you’re confident that the players will want to get in- them from whatever it was they were trying to do.
volved, you need to make sure they have a clear way Even so, the adventure should be short. A filler 
into the situation. If it’s a roil of political intrigue, give adventure shouldn’t take longer to complete than it 
them somebody to contact. If it’s a mysterious alien takes for you to come up with a good response to the 
ruin, give them a map to it. players’ initial goal. You just need to keep the players 

It’s not your job to develop a clear route through entertained long enough for you to figure out what 
the adventure, a step-by-step sequence of events that you’re going to do, so a filler adventure shouldn’t eat 
can predictably lead to success. It is, however, your job up more than a session at most.
to give the PCs a way to get involved in the situation. Lastly, the adventure should be simple. Don’t burn 
If you can’t see an obvious “first step” to the adventure, yourself out on complex entanglements and relations 
then it’s unlikely your players will be able to see one. to the existing adventure. If you can come up with a 

Is the adventure engaging? An adventure which good tie-in quickly, great, but the ideal filler adventure 
is about something fundamentally uninteresting to the is general enough to slot in almost anywhere.
players is just not going to hold their attention. Good Unused bits and pieces of your regular adventures 
sports will try to get through it simply because it’s what can be used as filler components. Don’t waste your 
you created for them, but other players will start play- work; if the PCs haven’t seen it, save it for later use.



178• Adventure Rewards

Adventure Rewards

Player characters all have their own reasons for seeking 
Reward Type Amount

adventure in the trackless void, but pragmatic rewards 
of wealth, power, and influence tend to be popular. A lot of money to a slum dweller 50
When designing your adventures, how should you ap- Slum dweller’s maximum funds 100
portion rewards, whether in experience points, pretech A lot of money to an ordinary worker 500
artifacts, or credits? Ordinary worker’s maximum funds 1,000

Rewarding Credits A lot of money to an affluent person 2,500
The first thing to understand about the credit econo- Affluent person’s maximum funds 5,000
my in your campaign is that “too much money” is not A lot of money to a wealthy person 25,000
a significant problem to have. Unlike many types of Wealthy person’s maximum funds 100,000
games, there’s really nothing the PCs can do with large 
amounts of money that will allow them to drastical- A lot of money to an oligarch 1 million
ly improve their own personal power. They can hire Oligarch’s available liquid funds 5 million
minions, they can buy starships, they can get cyberware, Moderately-skilled short contract work 20 / day
and they can use their wealth as a bludgeon of influence, An illegal but not serious crime job 500
but at the end of the day they still basically have the 
same character sheet as before. Serious but non-capital criminal job 1,000

In the same vein, in a sandbox campaign there is Kill someone who isn’t very important 5,000
no storyline to disrupt. If the PCs suddenly luck into Kill a significant or well-guarded target 50,000
a stellar tyrant’s ransom, then the campaign is about Kill a major government official 250,000
what they do with the money. Maybe it lets them ca-
sually crush the problems they used to have, but now think it’s reasonable to allow it in the first place. The 
they’ve got an entirely new set of concerns befitting PCs are going to have to come up with a plan or look 
their newfound wealth. Unless the PCs simply decide for an opportunity to grab the thing they want if they 
to stop adventuring after a lucky strike, their future don’t have the money to buy it outright.
campaign sessions will simply be flavored with great You can use this principle when the PCs want 
wealth and the problems and possibilities that come anything, whether it’s a ship, a particular ally, a base 
along with it. of operations, or anything else that can’t reasonably 

So don’t worry about “keeping the PCs hungry”. buy. Make them adventure for it. You can give them 
Just let them acquire the logical amount of money that suggestions and ideas, but it’s up to them to come up 
their deeds and situation would earn them. If they do with a plan for getting their hands on what they want.
a significant favor for a megacorp CEO, they should be Once they’ve done that, all you need to do is make 
earning a lot more than they’d get from the heartfelt up an adventure revolving around their efforts, and 
gratitude of a lostworlder peasant whose life they saved. you’ve got your evening’s entertainment. As always, 

With that in mind, here’s an adjacent list of reason- you should be watchful for opportunities to make PC 
able credit amounts that can be applied to adventures. ambitions into easy adventure outlines.
If the PCs do work for someone, they’ll get paid to the 
extent that they earned it and the patron can afford it. Rewarding Experience Points
If they come across lost loot or valuable cargo, you can There are several different methods to award experi-
use these numbers to gauge what a “big haul” would be ence points. The one you choose will depend largely on 
to most people in the setting. the kind of campaign you want to run and the speed of 

advancement you want for the PCs.
Rewarding Ships and Major Items The basic experience award for each member of 
Most groups are going to want to get their own starship a party is three points. This assumes a fairly fast rate 
relatively early on in the campaign. You might even of advancement, with PCs reaching second level after 
have the acquisition of a beaten-up merchant ship be their first award. If you want a slower one, drop it to 
the result of the introductory adventure. While it’s two points, or even one. All members of the group 
certainly possible for a sci-fi campaign to spend most should get the same basic award unless you want PCs 
of its time on a single world or for PCs to hitch rides of different levels in your group.
with allies and existing transport ships, most players When do you hand out this basic award? You have 
are going to want to get their own set of thrusters. several different choices.

The basic guideline for rewarding a ship or any Use a session-based system. Hand out the award at 
other major piece of hardware is that it’s going to take the end of every gaming session, assuming the PCs 
at least one session of adventure to get it, assuming you were trying to accomplish something worthy of their 



Adventure Rewards •179 

skills. Parties that coast along without facing any real Use a loot-based system. This sort of campaign 
challenges might not receive the award. doesn’t use experience points. Instead, it uses cash. 

Use a personal goal-based system. Have every PC list Every PC needs to earn 5,000 credits of liquid funds 
at least one long-term goal and one short-term goal. in rewards or loot before reaching second level. Then 
If they achieve a short-term goal during the session, they need to earn 10,000 more to reach third, 20,000 
give them a basic award. If they manage to succeed at more to reach fourth, and so on, with the new amount 
a long-term goal, give them triple that amount of expe- needed doubling at each level. Only wealth they’ve 
rience. Different characters can share the same goals if earned adventuring and converted into spendable cred-
they wish, and it’s up to the GM to decide whether or its counts toward this amount. Once a PC gains a level, 
not a particular goal is challenging enough to deserve their running “score” is reset to zero, and even huge 
a reward. PCs can pick new goals or change old ones hauls can’t boost them more than one level at a time.
at the end of each session. This experience method strongly incentivizes 

Note that if you use this method different PCs will ruthless plundering, and might result in uneven ad-
advance at different rates, depending on how often they vancement if the party doesn’t split their earnings even-
reach their goals. This isn’t a problem if the group is ly. It does make for a laser-focused game of freebooting 
fine with it, and if PCs work to make sure the party avarice, however.
isn’t focusing too much on the goals of only a few mem- Use a spending-based system. This works the same 
bers. If you want to help encourage spreading the focus way as the loot-based system, but the credits they earn 
around, you can rule that no PC can get goal XP again only count if the PC spends them. Credits spent on per-
until someone else in the group has achieved a goal. sonal equipment, cyberware, vehicles, or other directly 

Use a mission-based system. Have the group agree useful items don’t count. Only credits “wasted” in rev-
on a mission or goal at the end of each session or at the elry, charity, supporting some NPC cause, building a 
start of the campaign. When the group reaches that power base, or otherwise interacting with the game 
goal, they all get an experience award. They can choose world count toward the PC’s advancement.
to change their goal at the end of every session, or pick This, too, can result in a party with PCs of vary-
a new one if they’ve attained their original purpose. If ing character level over time, as some choose to buy 
they choose a particularly hard mission they might get hardware and others elect to “waste” the money. It does 
an extra bonus, at the cost of a greater risk of failure. encourage a great deal of engagement, however.



180• Problems

Creating Problems

Every Problem boils down to a fundamental conflict. A opposed. Just put forces on both sides of the focus and 
person wants something and they can’t have it, or they you’ll have your starting Problem.
don’t want something and are being forced to accept Some Problems have the PCs on one of the sides. 
it, or they have something and it’s being threatened, or If “Money was stolen from someone” and “The PCs are 
they want something and someone else wants it too. At owed it”, then the PCs themselves will have a powerful 
the bottom of every Problem there’s a conflict the PCs incentive to involve themselves in the conflict. Other 
can engage. These tables on these two pages provide Problems only have people on one side; if there’s a cat-
some cues for generating Problems for your adventures. astrophic natural disaster, the disaster itself is unlikely 

First, roll 1d8, 1d10, and 1d10 on the Conflict to have motivations or goals, while the hapless victims 
Type table on the opposite page. The first roll gives doubtless are struggling to survive.
you an idea of the general type of conflict at the bottom To add further decoration to the circumstances, 
of the adventure. It might be a matter of money, old you can roll on the tables below. The Restraint table 
grudges, a natural catastrophe, ethnic struggles, or one gives you a reason why the conflict hasn’t boiled over 
of several other root causes. You can stop at this point yet, and why the PCs might be a wildcard that can re-
if the cue is sufficiently inspirational. solve the problem at hand. Some Problems can keep 

Otherwise, the next roll gives you the overall situ- a long time with a sufficiently stern Restraint, which 
ation of the conflict. This is the backdrop to the adven- makes them convenient when you need to make filler 
ture, and while the PCs may not be able to resolve the adventures that can stay in storage until you need them.
entire conflict, they should be able to make a difference The Twist table gives you a turn you can add to 
in this particular skirmish. You can take this general the Problem, something to complicate the situation and 
context and decide on a specific event or situation that’s shake up easy assumptions about how it will play out.
causing the conflict at the heart of the Problem. At all times, you should be looking for chances to 

If further inspiration is needed, the third roll gives insert elements you’ve already created for this world. 
you a specific focus for the Problem. Something is hap- Use Enemies for antagonists, Friends for allies, and 
pening, and there are at least two sides involved; one slip in Complications when you need additional twists. 
that is in favor of what is happening, and one that is GMing is tough enough without making extra work.

d20 The Restraint The Twist

1 The government is cracking down on the conflict There’s a very sharp time limit for any resolution
2 One side seems invincibly stronger to the other The sympathetic side is actually a bunch of bastards
3 Both sides have “doomsday” info or devices There’s an easy but very repugnant solution to hand
4 A prior conflict ended horribly for both of them PC success means a big benefit to a hostile group
5 Foreign participants are keeping things tamped The real bone of contention is hidden from most
6 Elements of both sides seek accommodation A sympathetic figure’s on an unsympathetic side
7 The conflict is only viable in a narrow location There’s a profitable chance for PCs to turn traitor
8 Catastrophic cost of losing a direct showdown The “winner” will actually get in terrible trouble
9 Each thinks they’ll win without further exertion There’s a very appealing third party in the mix
10 They expect a better opening to appear soon The PCs could really profit off the focus of the strife
11 Former ties of friendship or family restrain them The PCs are mistaken for an involved group
12 Religious principles are constraining them Somebody plans on screwing over the PCs
13 One side’s still licking their wounds after a failure Both sides think the PCs are working for them
14 They’re building up force to make sure they win A side wants to use the PCs as a distraction for foes
15 Their cultural context makes open struggle hard The PCs’ main contact is mistrusted by their allies
16 They expect an outside power to hand them a win If the other side can’t get it, they’ll destroy it
17 They’re still searching for a way to get at their goal The focus isn’t nearly as valuable as both sides think
18 One side mistakenly thinks they’ve already won The focus somehow has its own will and goals
19 A side is busy integrating a recent success Victory will drastically change one of the sides

20 An outside power threatens both sides Actually, there is no twist. It’s all exactly as it seems.



Problems •181 

d8 Conflict Type d10 Overall Situation d10 Specific Focus

1 Money 1-2 Money is owed to a ruthless creditor 1-2 Organized crime wants it
3-4 Money was stolen from someone 3-4 Corrupt officials want it
5-6 A sudden profit opportunity arises 5-6 A sympathetic NPC needs it
7-8 There’s a hidden stash of wealth 7-8 The PCs are owed it
9-0 Money is offered from an evil source 9-0 It will disappear very soon

2 Revenge 1-2 Someone was murdered 1-2 It was wholly justified
3-4 Someone was stripped of rank 3-4 The wrong person is targeted
5-6 Someone lost all their wealth 5-6 The reaction is excessive
7-8 Someone lost someone’s love 7-8 The PCs are somehow blamed
9-0 Someone was framed for a crime 9-0 Both sides were wronged

3 Power 1-2 An influential political leader 1-2 They’ve betrayed their own
3-4 A stern community elder 3-4 Someone’s gunning for them
5-6 A ruling patriarch of a large family 5-6 They made a terrible choice
7-8 A star expert in a particular industry 7-8 They usurped their position
9-0 A criminal boss or outcast leader 9-0 They’re oppressing their own

4 Natural Danger 1-2 A cyclical planetary phenomenon 1-2 Anti-helpful bureaucrats
3-4 A sudden natural disaster 3-4 Religious zealots panic
5-6 Sudden loss of vital infrastructure 5-6 Bandits and looters strike
7-8 Catastrophe from outside meddling 7-8 The government hushes it up
9-0 Formerly-unknown planetary peril 9-0 There’s money in exploiting it

5 Religion 1-2 Sects that hate each other bitterly 1-2 Charismatic new leader
3-4 Zealot reformers forcing new things 3-4 Mandatory state religion
5-6 Radical traditionalists fighting back 5-6 Heavy foreign influence
7-8 Ethnic religious divisions 7-8 Religious purging underway
9-0 Corrupt and decadent institutions 9-0 Fighting for holy ground

6 Ideology 1-2 A universally-despised fringe group 1-2 Terrorist attack
3-4 Terrorists with widespread support 3-4 Street rioting
5-6 A political party’s goon squads 5-6 Police state crackdown
7-8 Dead-end former regime supporters 7-8 Forced expulsions
9-0 Ruthless ascendant political group 9-0 Territory under hostile rule

7 Ethnicity 1-2 A traditionally subordinate group 1-2 Forced immigration
3-4 An ethnic group from offworld 3-4 Official ethnic ghettos
5-6 A dominant caste or ethnicity 5-6 Rigid separation of groups
7-8 An alien or transhuman group 7-8 Group statuses have changed
9-0 Two groups that hate each other 9-0 Rising ethnic violence

8 Resources 1-2 There’s a cache of illegal materials 1-2 Someone thinks they own it
3-4 A hidden strike of rare resources 3-4 The state is looking for it
5-6 Cargo has been abandoned as lost 5-6 It has its own protectors
7-8 Land ownership is disputed 7-8 Rights to it were stolen
9-0 A resource is desperately necessary 9-0 Offworlders want it badly



182• People

Creating People

You’ll need People to help the PCs get involved in your or harm the party, the PCs aren’t going to have much 
adventure and to flesh out the personalities and im- motivation to care about their wants. Not every NPC 
portant figures in the Problem. Not every NPC needs will have much power, but they should all be able to do 
to be worked up fully, but it can be convenient to have something to help or hinder the PCs.
a few spare People around to drop in when the players Then you determine a hook, a visual or character 
suddenly take an interest in a bit-player NPC you never quirk that will help you describe them during play and 
expected they’d focus on. help the players remember who they are.

To generate a Person, start with their motivation. Lastly, if you want to make life a little easier for 
This is what the Person wants out of life, their major yourself, you can roll or pick an initial manner of 
focus and drive. The deals they offer and the actions approach and a default deal outcome for the Person. 
they take should revolve around this motivation. Dif- These additional tables help smooth out the handling 
ferent people will go to different extremes to follow of PC deals and negotiations with the NPC.
this motivation, so you shouldn’t feel obligated to make The initial manner is simply how the NPC will 
it a monomania for them, but it’s the basic driver of deal with the PCs during their initial meeting. Maybe 
their actions. they’ll be effusively appreciative of the party’s capabil-

Next, pick a want. This is the immediate thing the ities, or maybe they’ll be full of thin-lipped disapproval, 
NPC thinks will most effectively advance their moti- but their manner can give you some cues for playing 
vation. If the latter is “Promote a friend or offspring’s out the NPC’s interactions with the party.
career” and the want is “Burn down or destroy a partic- The default deal outcome can give you a cue as to 
ular structure”, then you simply have to figure out how how or if the NPC will keep any deal they make with 
burning down that place is going to advance the NPC’s the PCs. In some cases, you’ll already know whether 
daughter’s career. The want is what the NPC is most or not the NPC will play fair with the party, either be-
likely to desire the PCs to help them achieve. cause you know they’re essentially trustworthy people 

Now determine their power. This is what the or you know they’re double-dipped bastards. The table 
NPC can use to pay off the PCs or threaten them into is convenient when you’re not quite sure if an NPC is 
compliance. If a Person hasn’t got any power to help as good as their word.

d20 Initial Manner Default Deal Outcome

1 Ingratiating and cloying They’ll screw the PCs over even at their own cost
2 Grim suspicion of the PCs or their backers They firmly intend to actively betray the PCs
3 Xenophilic interest in the novelty of the PCs They won’t keep the deal unless driven to it
4 Pragmatic and businesslike They plan to twist the deal to their own advantage
5 Romantically interested in one or more PCs They won’t keep their word unless it’s profitable
6 A slimy used-gravcar dealer’s approach They’ll flinch from paying up when the time comes
7 Wide-eyed awe at the PCs They mean to keep the deal, but are reluctant
8 Cool and superior attitude toward PC “hirelings” They’ll keep most of the deal, but not all of it
9 Benevolently patronizing toward outsiders They’ll keep the deal slowly and grudgingly
10 Sweaty-palmed need or desperation They’ll keep the deal but won’t go out of their way
11 Xenophobic mistrust of the PCs They’ll be reasonably punctual about the deal
12 Idealistic enthusiasm for a potentially shared cause They’ll want a further small favor to pay up on it
13 Somewhat intoxicated by recent indulgence They’ll keep the deal in a way that helps them
14 Smoothly persuasive and reasonable They’ll keep the deal if it’s still good for them
15 Visibly uncomfortable with the PCs They’ll offer a bonus for an additional favor
16 Grossly overconfident in PC abilities Trustworthy as long as the deal won’t hurt them
17 Somewhat frightened by the PCs Trustworthy, with the NPC following through
18 Deeply misunderstanding the PCs’ culture They’ll be very fair in keeping to their agreements
19 Extremely well-informed about the PCs’ past They’ll keep bargains even to their own cost

20 Distracted by their current situation Complete and righteous integrity to the bitter end



People •183 

d20 Their Motivation Their Want

1 An ambition for greater social status Bring them an exotic piece of tech
2 Greed for wealth and indulgent riches Convince someone to meet with the NPC
3 Protect a loved one who is somehow imperiled Kill a particular NPC
4 A sheer sadistic love of inflicting pain and suffering Kidnap or non-fatally eliminate a particular NPC
5 Hedonistic enjoyment of pleasing company Pay them a large amount of money
6 Searching out hidden knowledge or science Take a message to someone hard to reach
7 Establishing or promoting a cultural institution Acquire a tech component that’s hard to get
8 Avenging a grievous wrong to them or a loved one Find proof of a particular NPC’s malfeasance
9 Promoting their religion and living out their faith Locate a missing NPC
10 Winning the love of a particular person Bring someone to a destination via dangerous travel
11 Winning glory and fame in their profession Retrieve a lost or stolen object
12 Dodging an enemy who is pursuing them Defend someone from an impending attack
13 Driving out or killing an enemy group Burn down or destroy a particular structure
14 Deposing a rival to them in their line of work Explore a dangerous or remote location
15 Getting away from this world or society Steal something from a rival NPC or group
16 Promote a friend or offspring’s career or future Intimidate a rival into ceasing their course of action
17 Taking control of a property or piece of land Commit a minor crime to aid the NPC
18 Building a structure or a complex prototype tech Trick a rival into doing something
19 Perform or create their art to vast acclaim Rescue an NPC from a dire situation

20 Redeem themselves from a prior failure Force a person or group to leave an area

d20 Their Power Their Hook

1 They’re just really appealing and sympathetic to PCs A particular odd style of dress
2 They have considerable liquid funds An amputation or other maiming
3 They control the use of large amounts of violence Visible cyberware or prosthetics
4 They have a position of great social status Unusual hair, skin, or eye colors
5 They’re a good friend of an important local leader Scarring, either intentional or from old injuries
6 They have blackmail info on the PCs Tic-like overuse of a particular word or phrase
7 They have considerable legal influence here Specific unusual fragrance or cologne
8 They have tech the PCs might reasonably want Constant fiddling with a particular item
9 They can get the PCs into a place they want to go Visible signs of drug use
10 They know where significant wealth can be found Always seems to be in one particular mood
11 They have information about the PCs’ current goal Wears badges or marks of allegiance to a cause
12 An NPC the PCs need has implicit trust in them Extremely slow or fast pace of speech
13 The NPC can threaten someone the PCs like Wheezes, shakes, or other signs of infirmity
14 They control a business relevant to PC needs Constantly with a drink to hand
15 They have considerable criminal contacts Always complaining about a group or organization
16 They have pull with the local religion Paranoid, possibly for justifiable reasons
17 They know a great many corrupt politicians Insists on a particular location for all meetings
18 They can alert the PCs to an unexpected peril Communicates strictly through a third party
19 They’re able to push a goal the PCs currently have Abnormally obese, emaciated, tall, or short

20 They can get the PCs useful permits and rights Always found with henchmen or friends



184• Places

Creating Places

Places can be very simple to create or very complex. If Those hazards can be derived from the opposite 
a Place is only needed as a backdrop for events and you table. The first roll gives a general type of hazard that 
don’t expect the PCs to spend much time exploring it, the PCs will have to face in an area or sub-area of the 
you really don’t need anything more than a name and Place, while the specific examples and possible dangers 
a few sentences of description for the table. If it’s to be provide more concrete suggestions.
an alien ruin, enemy base, or some other structure that You can apply these hazards to specific parts of 
the PCs are going to carefully interact with, you’ll need the Place, or if the area is too small to sustain much 
something more interesting. mayhem, you might roll once and apply it generally to 

For the former type of place, just pull an appropri- the entire location.
ate Place from the world generation data you’ve already One of the easiest ways to quickly produce an in-
created. You can then give it some background activity teresting area to explore is to go online and loot the 
from the table below. If it’s an urban, civilized sort of web for old-school-style fantasy adventure modules. 
location, you can roll for a Civilized Ongoing to indi- In many cases, the maps and floor plans can be stolen 
cate what’s happening there right now. If it’s a lost ruin, outright, while the room contents can be reskinned 
wilderness glade, or other wild place, roll or pick from with suitably sci-fi flavor. Most of these old adventures 
the Wilderness Ongoings list. use game mechanics that are similar to those used by 

If the PCs plan to investigate the place, you’ll want Stars Without Number, such as hit points, Armor Class-
a Reward to determine what worthwhile thing the PCs es, damage rolls, and gold piece values that can easily 
might find there. In some cases, you’ll already know be converted to credits. If you mix and match these 
what the Reward should be; if the PCs are going into components, using pieces from multiple adventures to 
an alien ruin to dig out a lost macguffin, then the mac- stitch together what you need, even those players who 
guffin itself will be the reward. You can still use the might have experienced the original adventure won’t 
Reward table to create some secondary loot prospects be able to recognize your handiwork.
in the place if you wish, the better to reward careful This principle of constructive looting is important 
exploration and creative overcoming of the area’s in- to any sandbox GM. Save creative energy for where it 
evitable hazards. counts. Everywhere else, plunder without shame.

d20 Reward Civilized Ongoings Wilderness Ongoings

1 Large cache of credits Local festival going on Bandits have moved in
2 Precious cultural artifact Angry street protests Flooding swept through
3 Vital data on the party’s goal Minor fire or other disorder Part of it has collapsed
4 Missing or kidnapped VIP Merchants and peddlers active Refugees are hiding here
5 Advanced pretech artifact Tourists from another country Dangerous animals lair here
6 Key to some guarded location Building repair or maintenance A rebel cell uses it for a base
7 Ancient treasure object Recent vehicle crash Smugglers have landed here
8 Recently-stolen goods Public art performance Foreign agents meet here
9 High-tech robotic servitor Angry traffic jam A hermit has taken up residence
10 Token item of ruling legitimacy Missionaries for a local religion A toxic plant is growing wild
11 Juicy blackmail material Loud advertising campaign An artist seeks inspiration here
12 History-rewriting evidence Memorial service ongoing An ancient structure was dug out
13 Alien artifact of great power Road work halting traffic The weather has turned savage
14 Precious megacorp data files Power outage in the area A vehicle crashed nearby
15 Map to some valuable thing Police chasing criminals Some locals are badly lost
16 Forbidden but precious drug Annoying drunks being loud Religious pilgrims come here
17 Legal title to important land Beggars seeking alms Locals fight over control of it
18 Awful secret of local government Constructing a new building Nature threatens to wipe it out
19 Cache of precious goods Local thugs swaggering around An old shrine was raised here

20 Stock of valuable weaponry Aerial light display A shell of a building remains



Places •185 

d8 Hazard d10 Specific Example d10 Possible Danger

1 Social 1-2 An explosively temperamental VIP 1-2 An allied NPC breaks ties
3-4 An unknown but critical social taboo 3-4 An enemy is alerted to them
5-6 A case of mistaken identity 5-6 A new enemy is made
7-8 An expectation for specific PC action 7-8 Cads think the PCs are allies
9-0 A frame job hung on the PCs 9-0 An opportunity is lost

2 Legal 1-2 A regulation unknown to the PCs 1-2 Substantial monetary fine
3-4 A tax or confiscation 3-4 Imprisonment for the party
5-6 Vital gear is prohibited here 5-6 Confiscation of possessions
7-8 Lawsuit from an aggrieved NPC 7-8 Deportation from the place
9-0 A state agent conscripts PC help 9-0 Loss of rights and protections

3 Environmental 1-2 Heavy background radiation 1-2 Catch a lingering disease
3-4 A planetary sickness foreigners get 3-4 Suffer bodily harm
5-6 Strong or weak local gravity 5-6 Take a penalty on rolls
7-8 Gear-eating microbial life 7-8 Lose some equipment
9-0 Unpredictable psychic power field 9-0 Psychic abilities are altered

4 Trap 1-2 Alarm system attached to a trap 1-2 Something set on fire
3-4 Snare left for local animals 3-4 Guards are summoned
5-6 Hermit’s self-defense measure 5-6 Fall to a new area
7-8 Long-dead builder’s trapsmithing 7-8 Equipment is damaged
9-0 New occupant’s defensive trap 9-0 Subject is injured

5 Animal 1-2 Dangerous local swarm vermin 1-2 They have a ranged attack
3-4 A big predator lair 3-4 They’re venomous
5-6 Pack hunters haunt the area 5-6 Dangerously coordinated foe
7-8 Flying threats pounce here 7-8 Killing them inflicts a fine
9-0 Monstrous beast sleeps or is torpid 9-0 Their deaths cause an effect

6 Sentient 1-2 A group hostile to intruders 1-2 Immediate combat
3-4 Trickster thieves and con-men 3-4 Treacherous feigned friend
5-6 Hostile expert-system robots 5-6 Lead the PCs into a trap
7-8 Secrecy-loving rebels or criminals 7-8 Demand payment or loot
9-0 Another area-clearing group 9-0 Activate other area defenses

7 Decay 1-2 Crumbling floor or ceiling 1-2 Ruptures to release a peril
3-4 Waste or heating tubes rupture 3-4 Toxic or radioactive debris
5-6 Dangerous standing liquid 5-6 Explosive decompression
7-8 Maintenance robots gone haywire 7-8 Invisible or slow-acting toxin
9-0 Power plant is unstable 9-0 Fires or explosions

8 PC-induced 1-2 Activating a system causes a disaster 1-2 Horrible vermin are admitted
3-4 Catastrophic plan proposed by NPCs 3-4 Local system goes berserk
5-6 Removing loot triggers defenses 5-6 Something ruptures violently
7-8 Handling an object ruins it 7-8 Ancient defenses awaken
9-0 Leaving a thing open brings calamity 9-0 The PC’s goal is imperiled



186• Adventure Seeds

Adventure Seeds

The hundred ideas that follow are basic outlines for 14.	 A Friend is threatened by a tragedy of sickness, le-
various adventures. Just take the components you’ve gal calamity, or public humiliation, and the only 
rolled for a given planet, slot them in the spaces noted one that seems able to save them is an Enemy.
in the adventure seeds, and build out from there to 15.	 A natural disaster or similar Complication strikes 
create an evening’s entertainment. a Place while the party is present, causing great 

If you want something more complicated than loss of life and property unless the party is able to 
these basic seeds provide, you can string several of immediately respond to the injured and trapped.
them together, gluing them into a single perilous cir- 16.	 A Friend with a young business has struck a cache 
cumstance to occupy the heroes. of pretech, valuable minerals, or precious salvage. 

As a general rule of thumb, a single seed should He needs the party to help him reach the Place 
occupy the group for a single session’s worth of adven- where the valuables are.
ture. If you need to create more content than that, you 17.	 An oppressed segment of society starts a sudden 
can scale events by adding additional complications or revolt in the Place the party is occupying. An En-
breaking the adventure up into several additional tasks emy simply lumps the party in with the rebels and 
or obstacles that must be overcome before the PCs can tries to put the revolt down with force. A Friend 
successfully resolve it. offers them a way to either help the rebels or clear 

their names.
1.	 An Enemy seeks to rob a Friend of some precious 18.	 A vulnerable Friend has been targeted for abduc-

Thing that he has desired for some time. tion, and has need of guards. A sudden Complica-
2.	 A Thing has been discovered on property owned tion makes guarding them from the Enemy seeking 

by a Friend, but a Complication risks its destruc- their kidnapping much more difficult. If the Friend 
tion. is snatched, they must rescue them from a Place.

3.	 A Complication suddenly hits the party while 19.	 A mysterious Place offers the promise of some 
they’re out doing some innocuous activity. precious Thing, but access is very dangerous due 

4.	 The players unwittingly offend or injure an Enemy, to wildlife, hostile locals, or a dangerous environ-
incurring his or her wrath. A Friend offers help in ment.
escaping the consequences. 20.	 An Enemy and a Friend both have legal claim on 

5.	 Rumor speaks of the discovery of a precious Thing a Thing, and seek to undermine each other’s case. 
in a distant Place. The players must get to it before The Enemy is willing to do murder if he thinks he 
an Enemy does. can get away with it.

6.	 An Enemy has connections with offworld pirates 21.	 An Enemy seeks the death of his brother, a Friend, 
or slavers, and a Friend has been captured by them. by arranging the failure of his grav flyer or shut-

7.	 A Place has been seized by violent revolutionaries tlecraft in dangerous terrain while the party is co-
or rebels, and a Friend is being held hostage by incidentally aboard. The party must survive the 
them. environment and bring proof of the crime out 

8.	 A Friend is in love with someone forbidden by so- with them.
cial convention, and the two of them need help 22.	 A Friend seeks to slip word to a lover, one who is 
eloping. also being courted by the Friend’s brother, who 

9.	 An Enemy wields tyrannical power over a Friend, is an Enemy. A Complication threatens to cause 
relying on the bribery of corrupt local officials to death or disgrace to the lover unless they either 
escape consequences. accept the Enemy’s suit or are helped by the party.

10.	 A Friend has been lost in hostile wilderness, and 23.	 An Enemy is convinced that one of the party has 
the party must reach a Place to rescue them in the committed adultery with their flirtatious spouse. 
teeth of a dangerous Complication. He means to lure them to a Place, trap them, and 

11.	 An Enemy has committed a grave offense against a have them killed by the dangers there.
PC or their family sometime in the past. A Friend 24.	 An Enemy has been driven insane by exotic rec-
shows the party a weakness in the Enemy’s defens- reational drugs or excessive psionic torching. He 
es. fixes on a PC as being his mortal nemesis, and 

12.	 The party is suddenly caught in a conflict between plots elaborate deaths, attempting to conceal his 
two warring families or political parties. involvement amid Complications.

13.	 The party is framed for a crime by an Enemy, and 25.	 A Friend has stolen a precious Thing from an En-
must reach the sanctuary of a Place before they can emy and fled into a dangerous, inaccessible Place. 
regroup and find the Thing that will prove their The party must rescue them, and decide what to do 
innocence and their Enemy’s perfidy. with the Thing and the outraged Enemy.



Adventure Seeds •187 

26.	 An Enemy has realized that their brother or sister 38.	 A former Enemy has been given reason to repent 
has engaged in a socially unacceptable affair with his treatment of a Friend, and secretly commis-
a Friend, and means to kill both of them unless sions them to help the Friend overcome a Com-
stopped by the party. plication. A different Enemy discovers the connec-

27.	 A Friend has accidentally caused the death of a tion, and tries to paint the PCs as double agents.
family member, and wants the party to help him 39.	 An alien or a human with extremely peculiar spiri-
hide the body or fake an accidental death before tual beliefs seeks to visit a Place for their own rea-
his family realizes what has happened. A Compli- sons. An Enemy of their own kind attempts to stop 
cation suddenly makes the task more difficult. them before they can reach the Place, and reveal 

28.	 A Friend is a follower of a zealous ideologue who the Thing that was hidden there long ago.
plans to make a violent demonstration of the 40.	 A Friend’s sibling is an untrained psychic, and has 
righteousness of his cause, causing a social Com- been secretly using his or her powers to protect 
plication. The Friend will surely be killed in the the Friend from an Enemy. The neural damage 
aftermath if not rescued or protected by the party. has finally overwhelmed their sanity, and they’ve 

29.	 A Friend’s sibling is to be placed in a dangerous now kidnapped the Friend to keep them safe. The 
situation they’ve got no chance of surviving. The Enemy is taking this opportunity to make sure 
Friend takes their place at the last moment, and the Friend “dies at the hands of their maddened 
will almost certainly die unless the party aids them. sibling”.

30.	 Suicide bombers detonate an explosive, chemical, 41.	 A Friend who is a skilled precognitive has just re-
or biological weapon in a Place occupied by the ceived a flash of an impending atrocity to be com-
party where a precious Thing is stored The PCs mitted by an Enemy. He or she needs the party 
must escape before the Place collapses on top of to help them steal the Thing that will prove the 
them, navigating throngs of terrified people in the Enemy’s plans while dodging the assassins sent to 
process and saving the Thing if possible. eliminate the precog.

31.	 An Enemy who controls landing permits, oxygen 42.	 A Friend who is an exotic dancer is sought by an 
rations, or some other important resource has a Enemy who won’t take no for an answer. The 
prejudice against one or more of the party mem- dancer is secretly a Perimeter agent attempting to 
bers. He demands that they bring him a Thing infiltrate a Place to destroy maltech research, and 
from a dangerous Place before he’ll give them the plots to use the party to help get him or her into 
goods. the facility under the pretext of striking at the En-

32.	 A Friend in a loveless marriage to an Enemy seeks emy.
escape to be with their beloved, and contacts the 43.	 A young woman on an interplanetary tour needs 
party to snatch them from their spouse’s guards at the hire of local bodyguards. She turns out to be a 
a prearranged Place. trained and powerful combat psychic, but touch-

33.	 A Friend seeks to elope with their lover, and con- ingly naive about local dangers, causing a social 
tacts the party to help them meet their paramour Complication that threatens to get the whole 
at a remote, dangerous Place. On arrival, they find group arrested.
that the lover is secretly an Enemy desirous of their 44.	 A librarian Friend has discovered an antique data-
removal and merely lured them to the place to bank with the coordinates of a long-lost pretech 
meet their doom. cache hidden in a Place sacred to a long-vanished 

34.	 The party receives or finds a Thing which proves religion. The librarian is totally unsuited for dan-
the crimes of an Enemy- yet a Friend was complicit ger, but necessary to decipher the obscure religious 
in the crimes, and will be punished as well if the iconography needed to unlock the cache. The 
authorities are involved. And the Enemy will stop cache is not the anticipated Thing, but something 
at nothing to get the item back. more dangerous to the finder.

35.	 A Friend needs to get to a Place on time in order to 45.	 A fragment of orbital debris clips a shuttle on the 
complete a business contract, but an Enemy means way in, and the spaceport is seriously damaged in 
to delay and hinder them until it’s too late, induc- the crash. The player’s ship or the only vessel ca-
ing Complications to the trip. pable of getting them off-planet will be destroyed 

36.	 A locked pretech stasis pod has been discovered by unless the players can organize a response to the 
a Friend, along with directions to the hidden key- dangerous chemical fires and radioactives contam-
code that will open it. The Place where the keycode inating the port. A Friend is trapped somewhere 
is hidden is now owned by an Enemy. in the control tower wreckage.

37.	 A fierce schism has broken out in the local majority 46.	 A Friend is allied with a reformist religious group 
religion, and an Enemy is making a play to take that seeks to break the grip of the current, oppres-
control of the local hierarchy. A Friend is on the sive hierarchy. The current hierarchs have a great 
side that will lose badly if the Enemy succeeds, and deal of political support with the authorities, but 
needs a Thing to prove the other group’s error. the commoners resent them bitterly. The Friend 



188• Adventure Seeds

seeks to secure a remote Place as a meeting-place lighting out for the back country. He and his plun-
for the theological rebels. der are holed up at a remote Place.

47.	 A microscopic black hole punctures an orbital sta- 56.	 A concert of offworld music is being held in town, 
tion or starship above the world. Its interaction and a Friend is slated to be the star performer. Re-
with the station’s artificial grav generators has actionary elements led by an Enemy plot to ruin 
thrown everything out of whack, and the sta- the “corrupting noise” with sabotage that risks 
tion’s become a minefield of dangerously high or getting performers killed. Meanwhile, a crowd 
zero grav zones. It’s tearing itself apart, and it’s of ignorant offworlder fans have landed and are 
going to collapse soon. An Enemy seeks to escape infuriating the locals.
aboard the last lifeboat and to Hell with everyone 57.	 An Enemy is wanted on a neighboring world for 
else. Meanwhile, a Friend is trying to save his engi- some heinous act, and a Friend turns up as a boun-
neer daughter from the radioactive, grav-unstable ty hunter ready to bring him in alive. This world 
engine rooms. refuses to extradite him, so the capture and retriev-

48.	 The planet has a sealed alien ruin, and an Ene- al has to evade local law enforcement.
my-led cult who worships the vanished builders. 58.	 An unanticipated solar storm blocks communica-
They’re convinced that they have the secret to tions and grounds the poorly-shielded grav vehicle 
opening and controlling the power inside the ru- that brought the group to this remote Place. Then 
ins, but they’re only half-right. A Friend has found people start turning up dead; the storm has awo-
evidence that shows that they’ll only devastate the ken a dangerous Enemy beast.
planet if they meddle with the alien power planet. 59.	 A Friend has discovered a partially-complete sche-
The party has to get inside the ruins and shut down matic for an ancient pretech refinery unit that pro-
the engines before it’s too late. Little do they real- duces vast amounts of something precious on this 
ize that a few aliens survive inside, in a stasis field world- water, oxygen, edible compounds, or the 
that will be broken by the ruin’s opening. like. Several remote Places on the planet are indi-

49.	 An Enemy and the group are suddenly trapped in cated as having the necessary pretech spare parts 
a Place during an accident or Complication. They required to build the device. When finally assem-
must work together to escape in time. bled, embedded self-modification software in the 

50.	 A telepathic Friend has discovered that an Enemy Thing modifies itself into a pretech combat bot. 
was responsible for a recent atrocity. Telepathic The salvage from it remains very valuable.
evidence is useless on this world, however, and if 60.	 A Complication ensnares the party where they are 
she’s discovered to have scanned his mind she’ll be in an annoying but seemingly ordinary event. In 
lobotomized as a ’rogue psychic’. A Thing might actuality, an Enemy is using it as cover to strike at 
be enough to prove his guilt, if the party can fig- a Friend or Thing that happens to be where the 
ure out how to get to it without revealing their PCs are.
Friend’s meddling. 61.	 A Friend has a cranky, temperamental artificial 

51.	 A Friend is responsible for safeguarding a Thing- heart installed, and the doctor who put it in is the 
yet the Thing is suddenly proven to be a fake. The only one who really understands how it works. 
party must find the real object and the Enemy who The heart has recently started to stutter, but the 
stole it or else their Friend will be punished as the doctor has vanished. An Enemy has snatched him 
thief. to fit his elite assassins with very unsafe combat 

52.	 A Friend is bitten by a poisonous local animal mods.
while in a remote Place. The only antidote is back 62.	 A local clinic is doing wonders in providing free 
at civilization, yet a Complication threatens to de- health care to the poor. In truth, it’s a front for 
lay the group until it is too late. an offworld eugenics cult, with useful “specimens” 

53.	 A lethal plague has started among the residents of kidnapped and shipped offworld while ’cremat-
the town, but a Complication is keeping aid from ed remains’ are given to the family. A Friend is 
reaching them. An Enemy is taking advantage of snatched by them, but the party knows they’d 
the panic to hawk a fake cure at ruinous prices, have never consented to cremation as the clinic 
and a Friend is taken in by him. The Complication staff claim.
must be overcome before help can reach the town. 63.	 Space pirates have cut a deal with an isolated 

54.	 A radical political party has started to institute backwoods settlement, off loading their plunder 
pogroms against “groups hostile to the people”. A to merchants who meet them there. A Friend goes 
Friend is among those groups, and needs to get out home to family after a long absence, but is kid-
of town before an Enemy uses the riot as cover to napped or killed before they can bring back word 
settle old scores. of the dealings. Meanwhile, the party is entrusted 

55.	 An Enemy has sold the party an expensive but with a valuable Thing that must be brought to the 
worthlessly flawed piece of equipment before Friend quickly.



Adventure Seeds •189 

64.	 A reclusive psychiatrist is offering treatment for 73.	 A Thing is the token of rulership on this world, 
violent mentally ill patients at a remote Place. His and it’s gone missing. If it’s not found rapidly, the 
treatments seem to work, calming the subjects existing ruler will be deposed. Evidence left at a 
and returning them to rationality, though major Place suggests that an Enemy has it, but extralegal 
memory loss is involved and some severe social means are necessary to investigate fully.
clumsiness ensues. In actuality, he’s removed 74.	 Psychics are vanishing, including a Friend. They’re 
large portions of their brains to fit them with re- being kidnapped by an ostensibly-rogue govern-
mote-control units slaved to an AI in his labora- ment researcher who is using them to research the 
tory. He intends to use them as drones to acquire lost psychic disciplines that helped enable pretech 
more “subjects”, and eventual control of the town. manufacturing, and they are being held at a remote 

65.	 Vital medical supplies against an impending plague Place. The snatcher is a small-time local Enemy 
have been shipped in from offworld, but the spike with unnaturally ample resources.
drive craft that was due to deliver them misjumped, 75.	 A Friend desperately seeks to hide evidence of some 
and has arrived in-system as a lifeless wreck trans- past crime that will ruin his life should it come to 
mitting a blind distress signal. Whoever gets there light. An Enemy holds the Thing that proves his 
first can hold the whole planet hostage, and an En- involvement, and blackmails him ruthlessly.
emy means to do just that. 76.	 A courier mistakes the party for the wrong set of 

66.	 A Friend has spent a substantial portion of their offworlders, and wordlessly deposits a Thing with 
wealth on an ultra-modern new domicile, and in- them that implies something awful- med-frozen, 
vites the party to enjoy a weekend there. An En- child-sized human organs, for example, or a pri-
emy has hacked the house’s computer system to vate catalog of gengineered human slaves. The 
trap the inhabitants inside and use the automated courier’s boss shortly realizes the error, and this 
fittings to kill them. Enemy tries to silence the PCs while preserving 

67.	 A mud slide, hurricane, earthquake, or other form the Place where his evil is enacted.
of disaster strikes a remote settlement. The party 77.	 A slowboat system freighter is taken over by En-
is the closest group of responders, and must rescue emy separatist terrorists at the same time as the 
the locals while dealing with the unearthed, mal- planet’s space defenses are taken offline by internal 
functioning pretech Thing that threatens to cause terrorist attacks. The freighter is aimed straight at 
an even greater calamity if not safely defused. the starport, and will crash into it in hours if not 

68.	 A Friend has found a lost pretech installation, and stopped.
needs help to loot it. By planetary law, the contents 78.	 Alien artifacts on the planet’s surface start beaming 
belong to the government. signals into the system’s asteroid belt. The signals 

69.	 An Enemy mistakes the party for the kind of off- provoke a social Complication in panicked re-
worlders who will murder innocents for pay- as- sponse, and an Enemy seeks to use the confusion 
suming they aren’t that kind, at least. He’s sloppy to take over. The actual effect of the signals might 
with the contact and unwittingly identifies himself, be harmless, or might summon a long-lost alien AI 
letting the players know that a Friend will shortly warship to scourge life from the world.
die unless the Enemy is stopped. 79.	 An alien ambassador Friend is targeted by xeno-

70.	 A party member is identified as a prophesied savior phobe Enemy assassins. Relations are so fragile 
for an oppressed faith or ethnicity. The believers that if the ambassador even realizes that humans 
obstinately refuse to believe any protestations to are making a serious effort to kill him, the result 
the contrary, and a cynical Enemy in government may be war.
decides the PC must die simply to prevent the risk 80.	 A new religion is being preached by a Friend on 
of uprising. An equally cynical Friend is deter- this planet. Existing faiths are not amused, and 
mined to push the PC forward as a savior, because an Enemy among the hierarchy is provoking the 
that’s what’s needed. people to persecute the new believers, hoping for 

71.	 Alien beasts escape from a zoo and run wild things to get out of hand.
through the spectators. The panicked owner offers 81.	 An Enemy was once the patron of a Friend until 
large rewards for recapturing them live, but some the latter was betrayed. Now the Friend wants re-
of the beasts are quite dangerous. venge, and they think they have the information 

72.	 A trained psychic is accused of going feral by an necessary to get past the Enemy’s defenses.
Enemy. The psychic had already suffered severe 82.	 Vital life support or medical equipment has been 
neural damage before being found for training, sabotaged by offworlders or zealots, and must be 
so brain scans cannot establish physical signs of repaired before time runs out. The only possible 
madness. The psychic seems unstable, but not vi- source of parts is at a Place, and the saboteurs can 
olent- at least, on short acquaintance. The psychic be expected to be working hard to get there and 
offers a psychic PC the secrets of a unique psychic destroy them, too.
technique if they help him flee.



190• Adventure Seeds

83.	 A Friend is importing offworld tech that threatens 93.	 The party’s offworld comm gear picks up a chance 
to completely replace the offerings of an Enemy transmission from the local government and au-
businessman. The Enemy seeks to sabotage the tomatically descrambles the primitive encryption 
friend’s stock, and thus ’prove’ its inferiority. key. The document is proof that an Enemy in gov-

84.	 An Exchange diplomat is negotiating for the open- ernment intends to commit an atrocity against a 
ing of a branch of the interstellar bank on this local village with a group of “deniable” renegades 
world. An Enemy among the local banks wants to in order to steal a Thing kept in the village.
show the world as being ungovernably unstable, 94.	 A Friend belongs to a persecuted faith, ethnicity, 
so provokes Complications and riots around the or social class, and appeals for the PCs to help a 
diplomat. cell of rebels get offworld before the Enemy law 

85.	 An Enemy is infuriated by the uppity presumption enforcement finds them.
of an ambitious Friend of a lower social caste, and 95.	 A part on the party’s ship or the only other trans-
tries to pin a local Complication on the results of port out has failed, and needs immediate replace-
his unnatural rejection of his proper place. ment. The only available part is held by an Enemy, 

86.	 A Friend is working for an offworld corporation who will only willingly relinquish it in exchange 
to open a manufactory, and is ignoring local tradi- for a Thing held by an innocent Friend who will 
tions that privilege certain social or ethnic groups, refuse to sell at any price.
giving jobs to the most qualified workers instead. 96.	 Eugenics cultists are making gengineered slaves 
An angry Enemy seeks to sabotage the factory. out of genetic material gathered at a local brothel. 

87.	 An offworld musician who was revered as little less Some of the unnaturally tempting slaves are being 
than a god on his homeworld requires bodyguards. slipped among the prostitutes as bait to infatuate 
He immediately acquires Enemies on this world powerful officials, while others are being sold un-
with his riotous ways, and his guards must keep der the table to less scrupulous elites.
him from getting arrested if they are to be paid. 97.	 Evidence has been unearthed at a Place that sub-

88.	 Atmospheric disturbances, dust storms, or other stantial portions of the planet are actually owned 
particulate clouds suddenly blow into town, leav- by members of an oppressed and persecuted group. 
ing the settlement blind. An Enemy commits a The local courts have no intention of recognizing 
murder during the darkness, and attempts to frame the rights, but the codes with the ownership ev-
the players as convenient scapegoats. idence would allow someone to bypass a number 

89.	 An Enemy spikes the oxygen supply of an orbit- of antique pretech defenses around the planetary 
al station or unbreathable-atmosphere hab dome governor’s palace. A Friend wants the codes to pass 
with hallucinogens as cover for a theft. Most vic- to his friends among the group’s rebels.
tims are merely confused and disoriented, but 98.	 A crop smut threatens the planet’s agriculture, 
some become violent in their delusions. By chance, promising large-scale famine. A Friend finds ev-
the party’s air supply was not contaminated. idence that a secret government research station 

90.	 By coincidence, one of the party members is wear- in the system’s asteroid belt was conducting ex-
ing clothing indicative of membership in a violent periments in disease-resistant crop strains for the 
political group, and thus the party is treated in planet before the Silence struck and cut off com-
friendly fashion by a local Enemy for no obvious munication with the station. The existing govern-
reason. The Enemy assumes that the party will go ment considers it a wild goose chase, but the party 
along with some vicious crime without complaint, might choose to help. The station has stasis-frozen 
and the group isn’t informed of what’s in the offing samples of the crop sufficient to avert the famine, 
until they’re in deep. but it also has less pleasant relics….

91.	 A local ruler wishes outworlders to advise him of 99.	 A grasping Enemy in local government seizes the 
the quality of his execrable poetry- and is the sort party’s ship for some trifling offense. The Enemy 
to react very poorly to anything less that evidently wants to end offworld trade, and is trying to scare 
sincere and fulsome praise. Failure to amuse the other traders away. The starship is held within a 
ruler results in the party being dumped in a dan- military cordon, and the Enemy is confident that 
gerous Place to “experience truly poetic solitude”. by the time other elements of the government 

92.	 A Friend among the locals is unreasonably con- countermand the order, the free traders will have 
vinced that offworlder tech can repair anything, been spooked off.
and has blithely promised a powerful local Ene- 100.	A seemingly useless trinket purchased by a PC 
my that the party can easily fix a damaged pretech turns out to be the security key to a lost pretech 
Thing. The Enemy has invested in many expen- facility. It was sold by accident by a bungling and 
sive spare parts, but the truly necessary pieces are now-dead minion of a local Enemy, who is hot af-
kept in a still-dangerous pretech installation in a ter the party to “reclaim” his property… preferably 
remote Place. after the party defeats whatever automatic defens-

es and bots the facility might still support.



An Example of Adventure Creation •191 

An Example of Adventure Creation

The GM has just started a new campaign, and he needs alien ruin. Only he survived, and his guilt is intense. 
to brew up an initial adventure to pull the party to- He still wears a nautical captain’s hat, and is hiding out 
gether and get them accustomed to the sector he’s just among the offworlders. He knows where he’s hidden 
created. He knows what planet the PCs are going to his ship and can guide the PCs to it if they can make 
begin on and he knows he wants them to end up own- the dangerous overland journey.
ing a battered free merchant starship by the end of the The GM isn’t so certain about the Captain’s want, 
session, but the rest is still up in the air. however. While something like that would make a 

He starts by deciding whether or not to use an ad- good sideline for a longer adventure, he wants this 
venture seed. While he sees a few that might work, he initial adventuring session to be relatively short and 
decides instead to roll up this adventure from scratch. straightforward. He replaces the want with the Cap-

The world he’s created is a planet known to its tain’s desire for the PCs to get him and his young off-
natives as Delaine, with the world tags “Alien Ruins” worlder wife off the planet, bringing them to just about 
and “Xenophobes”. The Delainers have numerous un- any place that isn’t on Delaine. He’s willing to give the 
explored alien ruins on their world, but fear them as PCs his ship if they just help him get away.
potential sources of catastrophe. They hate outsiders Why hasn’t the Captain snuck off with his young 
because the offworlders are constantly prodding at the bride yet? To answer that question, the GM turns to 
ruins and trying to loot them, and care nothing for the the Places section and rolls up a hazard. The result is 
disasters they might unleash on the locals. “Sentient”, which means that there’s an intelligent ene-

The GM knows that his first batch of PCs are very my between the Captain and the ship. The GM mulls 
unlikely to all be Delainers, so he decides that they were over the possibilities for a while, and decides the Cap-
all passengers on a smuggler ship that tried to land on tain wasn’t the only survivor. His first mate made it out 
Delaine and loot one of the ruins. The Delainer defense too, and blames the Captain. He’s gathered together a 
grid spotted the ship and knocked it down, however, small band of offworlder rebels and is seeking to loot 
and the PCs were among the few survivors. Maybe the ruins and harm Delainers, because he can’t operate the 
PCs were initially part of the smuggler crew, or may- ship without the Captain’s security codes and he’s not 
be they were just oblivious passengers. The GM will sufficiently talented to hack the locks himself.
let each player decide what their PC’s role was during At this point, the GM looks at the adventure and 
character creation. identifies the bits he needs to flesh out. He needs to 

The first step is to pick a Problem for the PCs to detail the Captain, the first mate, the offworlder rebels, 
get involved in. On the face of it, the obvious Problem and the Delainer security chief who will seek to appre-
for the PCs is that they’re marooned on a hostile world hend the PCs if they’re not sufficiently stealthy. All of 
and need to get off before the natives find them and these people will need combat stats. The Captain’s wife, 
either kill or imprison them. the offworlder reservation locals, and other bit NPCs 

The GM wants something a little more specific are unlikely to get into a fight, and don’t need stats.
than this, however. He rolls some dice on the Conflict The GM decides he doesn’t need a map for the 
table, and comes up with “Ethnicity” for the Conflict, offworlder reservation settlement, but he does need 
with “Two groups that hate each other” and “Official a map of the terrain between the settlement and the 
ethnic ghettos”. Given Delaine’s history, the GM de- hidden ship. He downloads a suitable terrain map from 
cides that any non-native Delainers present when the the web for that. On the map, he plants a few Wilder-
world shut down its contact with other planets were ness Ongoings from the Places table that the PCs may 
separated out into remote ethnic reservations, far away or may not encounter depending on how they chart 
from the ruins. These “offworlders” have been here for their course.
generations but are despised by the native Delainers. The last detail to flesh out is the first mate’s rebel 

With that established, the GM decides that the camp, and how the PCs might get at the starship they’re 
PC’s ship was shot down near one of these reservations, guarding. The GM decides that it’s not reasonable for 
and the bitter offworlders are interested in helping peo- the first mate to have accumulated a vast number of 
ple whom the Delainers hate. But who will the initial minions, but there are too many for the PCs to com-
Person the PCs contact be? fortably engage. The PCs will have to think of some 

The dice paint the picture of an offworlder mo- way to distract them, or possibly sic the Delainer secu-
tivated to redeem themselves from a prior failure, rity chief on them before they can get to the ship. It’s 
who wants to find proof of a rival NPC’s malfeasance, not the GM’s job to hand them a solution, so they’ll 
who knows where significant wealth is to be found, have to puzzle it out on their own.
and wears a particularly odd style of dress. From this, With that done, the starting adventure is ready. 
the GM creates “the Captain”, a former ruin smuggler The GM might add some more details and fluff, but 
whose crew was gunned down while trying to loot an what he has is a playable start to a campaign.






XENOBESTIARY
A band of interstellar adventurers can expect to en-
counter a wide range of creatures in the course of their The Reaction Roll
travels. Whether the hungry fauna of an uncharted One of the GM’s most important tools for managing 
planet or the trigger-happy gunmen of an alien organ encounters with NPCs is the reaction roll. Whenever 
smuggler, a GM needs to have the relevant statistics at the PCs first meet with a creature or NPC, the GM 
hand to manage probable hostilities. should roll 2d6 and consult the following table.

Handling Potential Combat 2d6 Reaction Result

Before picking foes from this chapter, however, a GM 2 Hostile, reacting as negatively as is plausible
should make sure that the enemies chosen and the 3-5 Negative, unfriendly and unhelpful
perils generated are appropriate for the situation. This 
does not mean that the enemies have to be an “appro- 6-8 Neutral, reacting predictably or warily
priate” combat challenge for the PC group, one that 9-11 Positive, potentially cooperative with PCs
they have a reasonable chance of defeating. It means 12 Friendly, helpful as is plausible to be
that they should be appropriate to the location and role 
they fill in the setting. The result should be taken in context. If the PCs 

If there’s a stretch of wilderness adjacent to a hu- just happen to run into a pack of hab-complex gang-
man community, a party-eating hellbeast should not ers, a positive result might simply mean the gangers 
be lairing there without some notice by the locals. If think it’s a bad idea to interfere with the PCs. That 
such an unstoppable horror does exist secretly in the same result when meeting a bored starport bureaucrat 
wilderness, the fact that it is hidden should be somehow might mean she’s feeling magnanimous, and is willing 
explained or meaningful. NPCs notice hazards next to help the PCs accomplish their purpose. In general, 
door, and PCs who pay attention should hear about low results make the situation more hostile than the 
that danger before they end up walking into its cave. predictable baseline, while high results make the NPC 

In the same vein, if the PCs run into a bunch of more friendly or cooperative than they might normally 
street thugs, the hooligans should not be exhibiting be under the circumstances.
Spartan discipline and crack military expertise unless Reaction rolls are important because they help a 
the PCs have gone slumming on a planet of genetic GM adjudicate a situation in a potentially surprising or 
super-soldiers. The goons might actually not be much interesting way. If the PCs are crossing a radioactive 
of a combat threat at all, and dangerous only for the badland crawling with violent scavenger tribes, the 
potential grudges the PCs could earn in executing them. GM might just reflexively assume that every scavenger 

Lastly, don’t add combat encounters that are un- band they encounter is immediately going to reach for 
avoidable. There are very few realistic situations where their scrap-guns. A reaction roll is a cue for the GM 
the only possible result is a gun battle. A group of trig- to pause and think, and a friendly result can open up a 
ger-happy mercs might happen to be sitting directly on situation with far more potential novelty than the sixth 
top of the party’s objective, but if there’s no way to lure consecutive gun battle. Conversely, even if everything 
them away or sneak past them– or worse, if you’re not seems to suggest an NPC should be helpful and friendly 
prepared to allow the PCs to try to lure them away or toward the PCs, a negative result can get the GM think-
sneak past them– then the players will learn not to try ing about potential reasons why the NPC is so hostile 
to solve problems with anything but a hot gun barrel. towards supposedly allied PCs.

Combat in Stars Without Number is dangerous. An NPC or a group’s initial reaction is not the last 
Every squeeze of a trigger risks killing a novice ad- word, of course. A silver-tongued PC might be able to 
venturer, and even a veteran of countless heroic deeds talk them out of hostility or induce them to do the party 
can get mowed down in a hurry by a half-dozen goons a favor, and more pragmatic offers of money, favors, 
with mag rifles. If your adventures funnel the PCs into or incipient violence might also sway their attitudes. 
near-unavoidable firefights or saber-toothed alien Such manipulation happens after the initial attitude is 
monsters, the PCs are going to suffer casualties. A cer- determined, however, and what exactly the PCs offer 
tain degree of death can add spice and excitement to a or threaten will usually depend on how the NPC is ini-
game and help make player choices feel more meaning- tially reacting to them.
ful, but inevitable gory disembowelment in the third 
inescapable pirate brawl of the day is just tedious.



194• Humanity

Humanity

Humans are likely to form the great majority of the 
NPCs that the heroes encounter, whether as patrons, Using the Table
companions, or the targets of their guns. In many cases The table provided in this section gives you bench-
a GM won’t need to bother with combat statistics for an marks for some basic NPC types and then a selection 
NPC. They might be so unmartial that they can present of specific examples. When you’re creating your own 
no serious threat to a party of hardened freebooters, or NPCs, you can use the benchmarks to get an idea of 
so distant that there’s no real chance that they’ll become where they should be, and the specific examples can be 
engaged in combat. In others, however, it’s necessary to pulled during play when you’re in need of quick oppo-
decide how much a particular NPC is worth in a fight. nents to stock your adventures.

The example human opponents here assume The table provides simplified combat statistics. 
normal baseline humanity. Those who have received NPCs don’t normally have foci, specific skill levels, 
extensive cyberware, gengineering, psychic augmenta- attribute scores, or any of the other details that add 
tion, or other exotic treatments may have abilities far complexity to PCs. Nor do they have classes or class 
in excess of their normal brethren, including unique abilities. Instead, simpler totals and summaries are used 
powers and special abilities. to account for these other factors. You can give NPCs 

class powers and foci if you wish, or even create an 
Degrees of Danger NPC as if they were a full-fledged PC, but that kind 
Most human NPCs on advanced, civilized planets are of detail and work is more than most NPCs are worth.
of almost no use in combat. By societal training and HD is the NPC’s hit dice. The overwhelming ma-
personal inclination, they are almost incapable of re- jority of NPCs have only one hit die. Only men and 
sponding to lethal threats with a quick, decisive reac- women with a history of surviving violence and deal-
tion. Citizens of less peaceful societies, where violence ing with mortal peril should have more than one hit 
is a commonplace, will have more useful reactions die. Just because an NPC is “important” doesn’t mean 
to such hostilities. Men and women who have been they have more hit dice. The CEO of an interstellar 
hardened to combat by experience or training will also megacorp probably has one hit die, as does the pres-
respond more effectively. ident of the planetary government. Conversely, the 

The combat statistics provided here cover the usu- grizzled warrior-king of a lostworlder monarchy or a 
al range of human martial talent. At the bottom are poison-wary bishop of a church where promotion is 
those soft citizens of peaceful worlds and at the top through mortality might have half a dozen hit dice. The 
are those engines of mortal ruin who are the most dan- most danger-hardened legends of a sector should have 
gerous men and women in the sector. Even more he- about ten hit dice, or more if they’ve been somehow 
roic appetites for slaughter can be found in those who altered by gengineering or advanced technology. An 
have been altered by genetic engineering or advanced NPC’s hit points are rolled at 1d8 for each hit die.
technical modifications, but such paragons of pain are AC is the NPC’s usual Armor Class. This will vary 
special cases to be judged by the GM accordingly. with the armor they’re wearing, and some NPCs might 

When assigning combat statistics to NPC, it’s im- have an included +1 or +2 bonus if they’re especially 
portant not to be influenced by the personal prowess of dexterous, but the listed score reflects the armor they 
the PCs. If country estate is protected by ordinary secu- usually have on. By default, this is street armor that 
rity guards, then the guards should be ordinary security is not obvious to casual inspection. Some entries are 
guards, whether or not the party could reasonably hope marked “primitive”, meaning that their armor is ig-
to defeat a dozen such protectors in open combat. The nored by advanced weapons, while others are marked 
universe does not scale to the PCs. If a party of un- “combat”, meaning that they wear very obviously pro-
tested novices finds themselves facing a squad of elite tective armor. Such NPCs might need to wear less ob-
killers, they should run. If those famously lethal killers vious gear in some social situations. A few of them are 
encounter the PCs six levels later, their fame might get marked “powered”, meaning that the NPC normally 
abbreviated in a hurry by the PCs’ grim new expertise. has access to some kind of advanced power armor that 

This even-handedness is important in creating a renders them immune to primitive weapons. When 
plausible, functional world for the players to operate in. creating your own NPCs, give them the armor that is 
If they know that challenges will be scaled up or down appropriate to their role and situation.
to give them a “fair fight” then it hardly matters what Atk is the NPC’s attack bonus. For the sake of sim-
challenges they choose to face. Planning to carefully plicity, this includes any attribute modifiers, skill bonus, 
avoid excess dangers and betting on overcoming more or other extra lethality that the NPC might have earned. 
reasonable threats makes their choices meaningful in For most NPCs, their attack bonus is equal to their hit 
your game world, and encourages the players to engage dice. Martial NPCs might have an additional bonus on 
carefully with the setting. top of that, or even attack twice with each Main Action.



Humanity •195 

General NPC Type HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves

Peaceful Human 1 10 +0 Unarmed 10m 6 +1 15+
Martial Human 1 10 +1 By weapon 10m 8 +1 15+
Veteran Fighter 2 14 +2 By weapon +1 10m 9 +1 14+
Elite Fighter 3 16 (combat) +4 By weapon +1 10m 10 +2 14+
Heroic Fighter 6 16 (combat) +8 By weapon +3 10m 11 +3 12+

Specific Examples HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves

Barbarian Hero 6 16 (primitive) +8 By weapon +3 10m 11 +3 12+
Barbarian Tribal 1 12 (primitive) +2 By weapon 10m 8 +1 15+
Gang Boss 3 14 +4 By weapon +1 10m 9 +2 14+
Gang Member 1 12 +1 By weapon 10m 7 +1 15+
Gengineered Killer 4 16 +5 By weapon +1 15m 10 +2 13+
Legendary Fighter 10 20 (powered) +12 x 2 By weapon +4 10m 12 +5 10+
Military Elite 3 16 (combat) +4 By weapon +1 10m 10 +2 14+
Military Soldier 1 16 (combat) +1 By weapon 10m 9 +1 15+
Normal Human 1 10 +0 Unarmed 10m 6 +1 15+
Pirate King 7 18 (powered) +9 By weapon +2 10m 11 +3 12+
Police Officer 1 14 +1 By weapon 10m 8 +1 15+
Serial Killer 6 12 +8 By weapon +3 10m 12 +3 12+
Skilled Professional 1 10 +0 By weapon 10m 6 +2 15+
Warrior Tyrant 8 20 (powered) +10 By weapon +3 10m 11 +3 11+

Dmg is the damage the NPC inflicts in combat. For Skills summarizes the NPC’s general aptitude at 
human combatants, this depends on the weapon they’re skill checks related to their profession or role. When 
using, with most ordinary men and women carrying the NPC needs to make a skill check or compete in an 
no real weapon. Very capable warriors might do ad- opposed skill check, they may add this skill bonus to 
ditional damage on top of the weapon’s roll, from +1 their roll if the test relates to role. If the activity has 
to +4 points. nothing especially to do with what the NPC would be 

Move is the distance the NPC travels when they good at, they cannot add this bonus, and just roll the 
take a Move action in combat. For humans, this is ten skill check unmodified. Most NPCs will have this at 
meters, though gengineered or other boosted subjects +1, while skilled professionals will have it at +2, and 
might be able to move faster than this. exceptionally gifted and expert NPCs will have it at +3 

ML is the NPC’s Morale score, their likelihood of or +4. Sector-wide legends will have it at +5.
retreating when in danger. When an NPC faces un- Saves are the single saving throw score that all 
usual peril, they need to make a Morale check on 2d6. NPCs use whenever they need to make a saving throw. 
If they roll equal or less than their Morale score, they Whether Mental Physical, or Evasion, the NPC rolls 
withstand the danger and continue fighting. If they roll against this single target. Most NPCs have a save score 
more than their Morale, they break. Poorly-trained of 15 minus half their hit dice, rounded down.
combatants will simply run for their lives or beg for 
mercy, while more hardened ones will make a fighting Psychics and Special Traits
withdrawal to a place of safety. PCs never need to make 
Morale checks. When building NPCs with psychic powers or oth-

Most groups will need to make a Morale check er special abilities, it’s usually not worth the effort 
the first time one of their members is killed or disabled, of rolling them up like PCs. Just assign them a few 
and the first time it looks like they’re losing the fight. If abilities you think will matter during the game and 
they succeed in both checks, they’ll continue fighting as give them a third of their hit dice in maximum 
long as it doesn’t seem hopeless. NPCs with no martial Effort, rounded up.
aptitude at all must also make a Morale check when In the same vein, gengineered humans or 
lethal combat begins; on a failure, they’re too shocked, rare virtuosos might have abilities akin to Foci or 
frightened, or disbelieving to do anything useful, and unique powers. Just assign them as fits the situa-
will stand frozen, run in terror, or try to ignore what’s tion, and don’t worry about making them like PCs.
obviously happening around them.



196• Robots and VIs

Robots and VIs
The prevalence of robots varies between sectors. Some used to create a True AI, but it still fails annoyingly 
positively teem with sentient VIs programmed for var- often. As a consequence, even sectors where the en-
ious purposes, while others have hardly any robotics at vironment allows the creation of VIs often prefer to 
all beyond industrial automation. The creation of par- use simple, cheap, reliably-replicable “dumb” expert 
ticularly sophisticated bots, especially sentient-seeming systems for mundane tasks.
VIs, is critically influenced by the local metadimension-
al energy environment. With an unfriendly higher-or- Expert System Bots
der energy shadow, the intricate quantum flux of VI The robots listed in the adjacent table are standard-is-

“brains” cannot function properly. True AIs are immune sue expert system bots, each one equipped with a level 
to such vagaries, but True AIs are almost impossible 1 expert system. Each expert system is programmed to 
to create in bulk, even for the lost industries of the handle a particular role: security, tour guidance, indus-
Terran Mandate. trial labor, household cleaning, personal companion-

ship, child care, or some other general field. The most 
Expert Systems and VIs basic programming and cognitive hardware counts as 
In the vast majority of sectors, robots are operated a “level 1” system. More sophisticated work allows for 
by expert systems programmed to carry out a specific level 2 programming, up to level 4 as the maximum for 
kind of work. These expert systems may feign human most TL4 sectors.
intelligence, but they are non-sentient and incapable Each level of expert system beyond the first comes 
of dealing with environments and situations outside with upgrades to the robot’s durability, danger manage-
their normal operational scope. The more sophisticat- ment, and exception handling skills. They also add to 
ed and expensive the expert system, the more flexible the robot’s base cost; a level 2 expert system doubles a 
it is about handling events within its purview. robot’s base cost, for example. The table below gives 

In some sectors, however, the local environment the various expert system levels, the hit die and saving 
is suitable for the creation of extremely sophisticated throw bonus granted by each, the attack bonus a given 
expert systems bolstered by quantum neural nets. It is level adds, and the skill check modifier to be applied to 
a constant point of debate over whether the resultant checks related to the bot’s intended function.

“Virtual Intelligences” are truly self-aware or simply 
give a perfect impression of such. Some sectors hold Level HD Atk. Skill Save Cost
the former, and grant VI full human rights, forbidding 
their makers from implanting behavioral imperatives. 1 Base Base Base Base Base
Most sectors believe the latter, using VIs as a labor 2 +1 +1 +1 1 lower x2
force programmed to deeply enjoy their utilitarian 3 +2 +2 +1 1 lower x4
function. VIs in such sectors can be bought, sold, and 4 +4 +4 +2 2 lower x8
mistreated much as any other piece of property.

While VIs have or can mimic human-level intel- Whenever the bot is put in a position not cov-
ligence, they can also be programmed with behavioral ered by its programming, it needs to make a confusion 
imperatives or curbs, giving them a deep urge to per- check. The GM rolls 2d6, adding its skill bonus, against 
form a certain kind of work or an unbreakable inability a difficulty based on the strangeness of the situation. 
to carry out certain kinds of acts. Most service VIs are A situation partly within its usual compass might be 
programmed with imperatives to love their work and difficulty 7, while a completely uncovered event would 
be thoroughly happy in carrying it out, as well as with be difficulty 9, and a situation that is both completely 
curbs against harming human beings or allowing them- uncovered and clearly dangerous would be 11. On a 
selves to be damaged. These impulses are overwhelm- success, the expert system does something reasonable 
ing, but not especially nuanced; the more specific and and in line with its function. On a failure, the expert 
complex the programmed psychological limit, the more system does what it’s normally meant to do in an inap-
prone it is to failure or misguidance. propriate way or direction.

VIs are not True AIs. They do not have a quantum Damaged bots can be repaired by someone with at 
identity core and they are inexorably tied into the spe- least Fix-0 skill and a postech toolkit. One unit of spare 
cific hardware and chassis they were created to operate. parts and fifteen minutes of work can repair a number 
While mods and adjustments can be made to this “birth of lost hit points equal to the bot’s expert system level. 
body”, the VI cannot be transplanted into a new chassis, Expert system bots reduced to zero hit points are de-
nor can they survive the destruction of their body. stroyed and cannot be salvaged.

VIs are much more difficult to produce than Expert system bots do have “morale” of a kind; 
non-sentient expert systems. The quantum growth when destruction seems imminent, most are pro-
process is much more reliable and tractable than that grammed to retreat. This can be overridden by owners.



Robots and VIs •197 

Robot Type HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves Cost

Janitor Bot 1 14 N/A N/A 5m 8 +1 15+ 1,000
Civilian Security Bot 1 15 +1 1d8 stun 10m 12 +1 15+ 5,000
Repair Bot 1 14 +0 1d6 tool 10m 8 +1 15+ 5,000
Industrial Work Bot 2 15 +0 1d10 crush 5m 8 +1 14+ 2,000
Companion Bot 1 12 +0 1d2 unarmed 10m 6 +1 15+ 2,500
Soldier Bot 2 16 +1 By weapon 10m 10 +1 14+ 10,000
Heavy Warbot 6 18 +8 x 2 2d8 plasma 15m 10 +2 12+ 50,000

Virtual Intelligences Types of Bots
In sectors where VIs can still be manufactured, the While a wide range of bots are available on the market 
price is equivalent to ten times the cost of an equiv- in most sectors, the selection given here cover most of 
alent expert system bot. Thus, a stock companion bot the robots likely to be encountered by PCs. Most ci-
upgraded with VI programming would cost 25,000 vilian bots are programmed to avoid harming humans, 
credits. To give a top-of-the-line heavy warbot with but such programming can be overridden by sufficient-
a level 4 expert system VI wiring would leave the bot ly determined owners.
costing a tremendous four million credits. Janitor bots are ubiquitous, cheap and reliable 

VI wiring does not integrate well with conven- droids that can clean up detritus and keep an office, 
tional expert system programming. The same static street, or private home tidy. Their small size and lim-
procedures and protocols that can make a level 4 ex- ited array of tools make them useless in a fight save as 
pert system so good at its specific task are difficult for targets or convenient explosives carriers.
a human-like VI intellect to process, and it requires Civilian security bots are sometimes found guard-
intensive and expensive cognitive reinforcement to ing locations. They’re not smart enough to handle 
allow the VI to take advantage of these resources. As a complex human interactions, but their tireless deter-
consequence, it is very rare for VIs to be implanted in mination is convenient when guarding a place that few 
high-end expert system bots. humans are expected to enter. Most models use a stun-

Most VIs do not develop additional skills or com- ning touch that non-lethally disables targets, while less 
petencies, nor do they exhibit personal growth or gentle bots are equipped with guns or melee weapons.
changes in personality. They are the way they have Repair bots and industrial work bots are found at 
been programmed, even if inhibitor curbs and behav- work sites and in starships or other complex technical 
ioral imperatives are absent. edifices. Expert system repair bots are extremely effi-

Some VIs, however, are different. For whatever cient about dealing with standard failures and damage, 
inexplicable reason, these VIs are capable of learning but they can “panic” when faced with crises beyond 
and growing as human beings are. They lack the po- their usual operating parameters. Industrial work bots 
tential for godlike intelligence possessed by True AIs are slow, tough, heavy machines most often used for 
and they cannot make effective use of supplementary lifting and manipulating heavy objects in need of laser 
cognitive resources as True AIs can, but over time and welding or other shaping.
with experience, these VIs can become as skilled and Companion bots range from nannybots and petbots 
capable as any human. to specially-designed “companions” for other purposes. 

Such “clever” VIs are an annoyance in sectors The latter are strictly regulated on many worlds, either 
where VI bots are common. Buyers don’t want their to encourage reproduction, to quash their use for rep-
receptionist bots to suddenly decide they’d rather be rehensible urges, or out of perceived fears of societal 
poets, and while behavioral imperatives and inhibitor decay and decadence.
curbs still have an effect on clever VIs, some of these Soldier bots are designed on humanoid lines so as 
bots can “out-think” their limits and sidestep these to easily use standard human vehicles and equipment. 
blocks. Some worlds allow clever VIs to exist as free The chaotic and confusing nature of warfare leaves 
citizens, while others consider them public nuisances most soldier bots of somewhat limited utility without 
to be scrapped if they wander off from their owners. a human bot wrangler to direct them, but when a wave 

VI bots are more durable than their ordinary cous- attack is needed, a simple self-preservation toggle can 
ins. If reduced to zero hit points by trauma less than a be flipped off and the iron horde can be aimed at a foe.
hit with a Heavy weapon or similar complete ruin, they Heavy warbots are ogreish engines of war with in-
can be repaired with 24 hours of work by one tech with tegral plasma guns and the ability to attack twice with 
Fix-0. Jury-rigging a downed VI back into operation is each Main Action. In addition, most are capable of 
much faster, allowing them to “heal” with spare parts mounting a Heavy weapon which may be fired in lieu 
as if they were an ordinary bot. If reduced to zero HP of the plasma guns. They’re most often used as mobile 
again before a 24-hour overhaul, however, they perish. heavy weapons platforms for squads in the field.



198• Robots and VIs

Robots In Your Campaign Other GMs will want to increase the impact of VIs 
A GM is not obligated to include VIs or ubiquitous ro- on particular worlds. Perhaps some of them have large-
botics in her campaign. Adding these elements can have ly replaced their low-skilled members with VI laborers, 
a significant effect on a setting, and sometimes they and the replaced humans are either frustrated and an-
can prove to be a distraction from the sort of play that gry or kept pacified by robotic dole payments. Other 
the group wants to have. A GM is always well within worlds might dispute the lack of rights that most VIs 
her rights to simply decide that the sector lacks the have, insisting that a VI ought not to be programmed 
necessary metadimensional environment for VI pro- with behavioral imperatives at “birth”, but be allowed 
duction and is short on many of the critical minerals to choose its own functionality. Of course, it might be 
for producing expert system bots. Outside of industrial that almost no one would bother to build them in that 
assembly lines and mindless extraction work, labor is case, but such crusaders might believe it better that a 
performed by humans. VI never be “born” than that it be created in servitude. 

Sometimes, however, a GM will want to include In brief, the GM can pick some aspect of VI existence 
VIs in her sector, either because she’s emulating a genre and use the conflicts inherent in it to spice up the sector.
where intelligent robots are a commonplace, or because Expert system bots are less disruptive to a cam-
a particular player wants to play a PC VI, or because paign because they come with less moral baggage that 
she simply likes them. a society has to deal with. It’s easy for a GM to simply 

If a GM does decide to add VIs to her setting, she’ll decide that most expert system bots are only smart 
need to decide how common they are and how most enough for simple industrial tasks or menial labor, and 
of the worlds in the sector treat them. The simplest that the impact they have on the local economy doesn’t 
way to do this is to gently gloss over the economic and necessarily force it into some strange futuristic pattern. 
social impact of VIs. The world operates much as it There are still poor janitors, grouchy middle-aged se-
does today, with humans doing most of the work and curity guards, and cynical street-corner prostitutes in 
VIs serving only occasional functions as showpieces an age of robotic labor.
of the wealthy or off-stage laborers in industry. They Some PC groups will be very keen to buy robots 
are programmed to love their work, they’re “happy” in of their own, the better to help in their adventures. So 
a robotic sense, and the various worlds of the sector long as you keep an expert system’s limitations in mind, 
give little consideration to wider issues of VI rights or this shouldn’t be disruptive, and it would make an ex-
the morality of programmed VI behavioral imperatives. cellent sink for a party’s excess money.



VI Player Characters •199 

VI Player Characters

In campaigns where the GM allows it, a player can 
choose to make a VI as a player character. They do this Android
by spending their free focus pick on one of the origins You were built as an android, a robot indistinguish-
listed below. These origin foci have only one level, and able from a human without a medical-grade inspection. 
normally can only be taken during character creation. Most androids are “companion” bots, though other VIs 
In exceptional cases, a human PC transformed into a with roles that involve significant human interaction 
full-conversion cyborg might be allowed to take it later. may also be built as androids. Minor scuffs and cuts 

don’t reveal your robotic nature, but if reduced to zero 
Special VI Rules hit points, your unnatural innards are obvious.
All VI PCs have the same attributes, hit points, abilities, Level 1: Gain a bonus skill related to your intended func-
and character classes as humans do, but normal VIs tion. You have all the usual traits and abilities of 
cannot be Psychics nor take the Partial Psychic class a VI robot.
option for Adventurers. They are created the same 
way as any other human PC and start out at first level. VI Worker Bot
While they may have been built to be a particular type You were built for industrial or technical labor, where 
of bot, they use their own statistics, and not those for a human face was an unnecessary luxury. Most such 
their type on page 197. VIs that are not wearing armor VI bots are humanoid, if only to more conveniently 
normally have Armor Class 10, just as humans do. manipulate human-scale devices, but their inhuman 

VIs need neither sleep, eat, nor drink, requiring nature is obvious.
one Type B cell per week of operation away from read- Level 1: Gain a bonus skill related to your intended 
ily-available current. They are immune to vacuum but function. Choose an attribute associated with your 
suffer degradation from radiation as humans do. They work and gain a +1 bonus to its modifier, up to a 
cannot be poisoned or diseased by normal forms of maximum of +2. You have all the usual traits and 
toxin. They can be reprogrammed, altering or erasing abilities of a VI robot.
their personality and behavioral limits, but such men-
tal remodeling takes at least an undisturbed month to VI Vehicle Bot
execute by someone with at least Program-1 skill. Most Some VIs were instantiated in actual vehicles rather 
VIs will fight to their destruction to avoid such a fate. than conventional humanoid bodies. Most were purely 

VIs can be healed with spare parts and the work of synthetic in origins, but some sectors retain the tech-
someone with Fix-0 skill. VIs can always repair them- niques for brain transplants into non-human bodies. 
selves, even without the requisite skill. Each unit of Some polities have been known to conduct full-body 
spare parts heals lost hit points equal to the VI’s charac- cyberneticization of soldiers into tanks, warships, at-
ter level and takes fifteen minutes to apply. VIs cannot tack helicopters, and other military vehicles. As a ve-
normally be affected by biopsionic healing effects. hicle, you are usually equipped with manipulator arms 

VIs reduced to zero hit points but not entirely that can be used on adjacent objects. You may oper-
smashed are incapacitated and Badly Damaged. Re- ate the individual elements of your vehicle as if they 
moving this quality requires 24 hours of work by a were your own limbs, attacking once per round with a 
technician and at least one unit of spare parts, after mounted weapon of your choice.
which damage can be repaired as normal. As a field Level 1: Gain Pilot as a bonus skill. Pick a vehicle ac-
expedient, a tech can jury-rig a Badly Damaged VI in ceptable to the GM, usually a drone, hoverbike 
the field, healing it with spare parts at the normal rate or gravcar. You become that vehicle. You retain 
and speed. If such a bot is reduced to zero hit points your usual attributes but gain the vehicle’s Armor 
again while Badly Damaged, however, it must make a score. You are Armor Class 10, modified by your 
Physical save or be permanently destroyed. Dexterity score. A tech can improve your Armor 

VIs are intimately connected to their specific hard- Class by aftermarket modifications, adding up to 
ware, and cannot be transplanted into new forms. Cos- three times their Fix skill to your Armor Class at 
metic alterations can be made, however, and equipment a cost of 1,000 credits per point of improvement.
can be grafted into the VI’s chassis. Such built-in equip- You use the vehicle’s hit points until your 
ment costs twice as much as a stand-alone component own normally-rolled hit point score exceeds that 
and takes a week to properly integrate into the VI’s number. Many VI vehicles purchase a drone or 
system. A VI can have a total number of encumbrance humanoid robot body to carry on board and em-
points worth of additional gear grafted onto it equal to ploy for remote operation in areas unsuitable for 
half its Constitution score, rounded down. Such gear a vehicle; you can pilot a single surrogate body in 
may require its own separate power source or ammu- lieu of your own Main Action, provided there’s no 
nition supply. VIs cannot make use of cyberware. ECM to jam the control transmissions.



200• Beasts

Beasts

Most alien beasts are simply flavor for a world, odd 
creatures to decorate the background and provide some Swarms
light interest for the players. Sometimes, however, a Sometimes a beast is only meaningfully dangerous in 
GM needs a genuinely dangerous beast, either to oc- vast packs, like a swarm of ants or a squealing tide of 
cupy some perilous wilderness or to threaten the PCs ravenous rats. Other times beasts are found most often 
and their allies. in huge herds rather than as lone individuals.

When creating a beast, work from your needs. To create such a swarm, take the basic animal type 
Build the creature with the statistics and role that you and quadruple its hit dice. For tiny creatures that have 
need for your adventure, and then decorate those basic only 1 hit point, give the swarm 4 hit dice. The swarm 
statistics with the creature’s appearance, special hazards, gets its usual attack against anyone in contact with it, 
and behavior. but on a miss, it still does the minimum possible dam-

age to the target unless the victim is immune to its 
Creating Beasts attacks. Thus, a rat swarm that has a +1 attack bonus 
To build an alien beast, it’s easiest to start with some and does 1d2 damage on a hit would roll that attack 
Terran referent. A completely alien and exotic creature against every PC caught in the swarm. On a hit, they 
with no relation to any earthly life form tends to be would do 1d2 damage, and a miss would still do 1 point.
very difficult to explain to players and it can be awk- Any attack against the swarm automatically hits, 
ward for the GM to guess its normal behavior. assuming the weapon is useful. Firing a pistol into a 

The tables on the opposite page provide some ba- creeping carpet of ants is singularly useless, but waving 
sic suggestions for styling the essential animal features a flaming torch in front of rats or throwing a grenade 
of the beast. Start with the “Basic Animal Features” to into the swarm might help dispatch the pack.
get the creature’s general theme, and then move on to 
identify its body plan. You might then add on some Beast Behavior
novelty to its limbs or skin, decide the main weapon it Many alien creatures will have no inherited aversion 
uses to hunt prey or defend itself, and choose a general to humans, and will not fear them. Predators will hunt 
size for the animal. them if they look like food and prey will ignore them 

The basic animal features serve only as a starting if they don’t look like predators.
point for your creativity. The creature might have a In combat, predators will only fight to the death if 
mammalian general plan, but you could then decide maddened or cornered. Sane predators cannot afford to 
that its “fur” is a stiff, glassy mineral exudate that slashes get hurt while hunting. In addition to the usual times 
anything that bites or strikes it. It can be helpful to stick for Morale checks, beasts must make an additional 
to one basic animal type for a given alien world, with all check the first time their “prey” harms the predator.
the creatures the PCs encounter sharing similar broad 
features or common traits. Importing Creatures

While a fully-developed ecosphere might include Aside from the beasts you can create with these charts, 
countless different evolutionary strategies, sticking to an endless supply of fantasy monsters and exotic crea-
just one or two in play helps characterize a world and tures await lifting from other old-school games. Almost 
give a sense of consistency to its fauna. If all the dan- any of the “monsters” found in traditional old-school 
gerous creatures of Scutum have thick moss-colored role-playing games can be imported almost unchanged 
armor plating, then the PCs will be able to guess that a into Stars Without Number, requiring little more than 
strange creature with thick moss-colored armor plating an attack bonus and Armor Class conversion. Reskin 
is probably an import from Scutum. them to fit your needs, and voila; you have your beast.

Beast Type HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves

Small Vicious Beast 1 HP 14 +1 1d2 10m 7 +1 15+
Small Pack Hunter 1 13 +1 1d4 15m 8 +1 15+
Large Pack Hunter 2 14 +2 1d6 15m 9 +1 14+
Large Aggressive Prey Animal 5 13 +4 1d10 15m 8 +1 12+
Lesser Lone Predator 3 14 +4 x 2 1d8 each 15m 8 +2 14+
Greater Lone Predator 5 15 +6 x 2 1d10 each 10m 9 +2 12+
Terrifying Apex Predator 8 16 +8 x 2 1d10 each 20m 9 +2 11+
Gengineered Murder Beast 10 18 +10 x 4 1d10 each 20m 11 +3 10+



Beasts •201 

d10 Basic Animal Features

Styling the Beast 1 Amphibian, froggish or newtlike
2 Bird, winged and feathered

You can use these tables to assemble a general look for 
your beast. First, roll on the basic animal features table 3 Fish, scaled and torpedo-bodied
to get a general “theme” for the creature. If you ever 4 Insect, beetle-like or fly-winged
need inspiration for particular details about the crea-

5 Mammal, hairy and fanged
ture, just refer back to its basic theme.

Next, roll on the tables below to get additional in- 6 Reptile, lizardlike and long-bodied
spiration. Note that you don’t have to roll on any par- 7 Spider, many-legged and fat
ticular one. Instead, just use them to fill in the blanks 8 Exotic, made of wholly alien elements
and spark your own creativity, editing things when 
necessary to fit the creature’s intended role. 9-10 Roll twice and mix the results.

d6 Body Plan Limb Novelty Skin Novelty Main Weapon Size

1 Humanoid Wings Hard shell Teeth or mandibles Cat-sized
2 Quadruped Many joints Exoskeleton Claws Wolf-sized
3 Many-legged Tentacles Odd texture Poison Calf-sized
4 Bulbous Opposable thumbs Molts regularly Harmful discharge Bull-sized
5 Amorphous Retractable Harmful to touch Pincers Hippo-sized
6 Roll twice Varying sizes Wet or slimy Horns Elephant-sized

Behavioral Traits

d8 Predator Prey Scavenger

1 Hunts in kin-group packs Moves in vigilant herds Never attacks unwounded prey
2 Favors ambush attacks Exists in small family groups Uses other beasts as harriers
3 Cripples prey and waits for death They all team up on a single foe Always flees if significantly hurt
4 Pack supports alpha-beast attack They go berserk when near death Poisons prey, waits for it to die
5 Lures or drives prey into danger They’re violent in certain seasons Disguises itself as its prey
6 Hunts as a lone, powerful hunter They’re vicious if threatened Remarkably stealthy
7 Only is predator at certain times Symbiotic creature protects them Summons predators to weak prey
8 Mindlessly attacks humans Breeds at tremendous rates Steals prey from weaker predator

d8 Harmful Discharges d6 Poison Onset Duration

1 Acidic spew doing its damage on a hit 1 Death Instant 1d6 rounds
2 Toxic spittle or cloud, use adjacent chart 2 Paralysis 1 round 1 minute
3 Super-heated or super-chilled spew 3 1d4 dmg per 1d6 rounds 10 minutes
4 Sonic drill or other disabling noise onset interval

5 Natural laser or plasma discharge 4 Convulsions 1 minute 1 hour

6 Nauseating stench or disabling chemical 5 Blindness 1d6 minutes 1d6 hours

7 Equipment-melting corrosive 6 Hallucinations 1 hour 1d6 days

8 Explosive pellets or chemical catalysts You can roll three times on the table above to generate 
a poison for a creature, or pick to suit your needs. Most 

Harmful discharges usually use a normal attack roll and effects incapacitate a victim, though blindness or ongo-
inflict the typical damage on a hit. At your discretion, ing damage may not wholly disable a PC.
some discharges may have additional effects, such as PCs can usually attempt a Physical save to resist a 
poison, gear destruction, ongoing acidic damage, or poison. Toxins can be treated with a medkit or antidote 
an explosive area of effect. Appropriate Physical or stim. If the medic lacks the specific antidote to a poison, 
Evasion saving throws might be called for to avoid the they can make an Int/Heal skill check to try to halt it. 
worst of such perils. The difficulty is usually 9, with one check allowed.



202• Aliens

Aliens

Exotic alien races are a staple of science fiction, and use aliens to drive the process. The matter might be 
most GMs running Stars Without Number are going so important to the aliens that they find themselves 
to want a few types of sapients to round out a sector. willing to employ human agents to accomplish their 
Some GMs might prefer to run a strictly human game, ends, or it may be that only humans have the numbers 
leaving humanity alone in this particular corner of the and strength to help them.
cosmos, but other GMs will want to have the details Aliens are occasions for exploration and discov-
of a few alien races in hand, if only to help envision ery. While this may not have the immediate adventure 
the kind of artifacts and ruins that they might have left utility of an antagonist or a patron, one of the things 
behind. This section will discuss the role of aliens in a about sandbox gaming that appeals to many players 
game and a process for creating your own alien races. is the opportunity to go out and discover new things. 

The universe is full of bizarre and exotic beings, and 
The Use of Aliens in the Game there can be a lot of enjoyment in learning about their 
When adding an alien race to your sector, it’s neces- cultures and traits. Most players aren’t interested in a 
sary to keep in mind the ultimate purpose you have for full-dress anthropological study of an alien race, but 
including them. A given species might be fascinating there is an excitement in visiting uncharted worlds and 
to you, but if they don’t actually help to accomplish meeting strange and wondrous beings.
something for your game it’s likely that the players will In some cases, this exploration doesn’t even need 
simply gloss over their existence. By having a concrete live aliens. The universe is laden with numerous an-
purpose in mind for a race you can ensure that the cient alien ruins, and players can get a good conception 
players have a useful reason to interact with them. of a long-lost race simply from examining what they’ve 

Aliens are useful as antagonists. The classic “bug- left behind. A GM with a firm grasp on a species’ psy-
eyed monster” trope has survived for a reason; unthink- chology and physiology has much of what he needs to 
ingly hostile and uncommunicative beings make great create their abandoned cities and outposts and to stock 
fodder for brute physical struggle. Making these mon- them with art, artifacts, and remnants for the entice-
sters part of a sapient, tool-using species allows them to ment of exploring PCs.
scale upward in threat the way no beast can, and con- Humanoid species make the most widely useful 
tinue to imperil even an experienced, well-equipped aliens, and most of the species you create should proba-
band of adventurers. bly be of that variety. Aliens that are too hard to under-

Antagonism can take more forms than simple stand tend to be more animate plot devices, operating 
combativeness. Aliens can want things, and want them by utterly incomprehensible rules and motivations. 
for reasons that would make no sense at all to a human. Human-like races allow more scope for diplomacy and 
Biological imperatives, exotic religions, alien philoso- response to an alien culture, because their societies are 
phies, and customs born on completely un-Earth-like fundamentally comprehensible by humans.
worlds can all justify goals and purposes that would be 
entirely irrational for a human being. Humans might The Like and the Others
find themselves at cross purposes with these aliens Most alien races in the universe of Stars Without Num-

without ever fully understanding why the beings are ber can be divided up into two different classes – the 
pursuing a given goal. Like and the Others. The Like are those species with in-

From a GM’s perspective, this is a wonderful trait tellects and societies that are at least somewhat compre-
for building adventures. If you need aliens to pursue hensible to humankind. They may have exotic biologies 
some goal, however bizarre, you can simply add a trait and strange customs, but humans can understand their 
to them that makes that goal important. For example, motivations and deal with them within a more-or-less 
if you need aliens to be obsessed with wiping out the comprehensible framework.
humans on a given planet, you can simply decide that The Others are those species that are simply too 
the planet is their ancestral homeworld, to which they alien for human communication. Entities of sentient 
must return every thousand years in order to perform a lithic structures, congeries of crystal, even intelligent 
great spawning rite. The presence of the humans there waveform interactions created by the interplay of en-
defiles the world, and the aliens grow increasingly fran- ergies through alien rock formations… the Others are 
tic as the time for the rite approaches. simply too different for humans to understand. Their 

Aliens also make excellent patrons for many of the goals are incomprehensible, their technology is often 
same reasons that they make good antagonists. You can hard to even recognize, let alone use, and it’s possible 
give them a good reason to want almost anything, and that they don’t even realize that humanity is a sentient 
players are unlikely to balk at it as unlikely or implau- species. The Others are generally avoided if at all pos-
sible. If you need to give the players a reason to go sible, though at times “wars” break out when an Other 
somewhere, do something, or find something, you can species vents anger on humanity for reasons unknown.



Aliens •203 

Other races are rare, but some xenologists have d6 Alien Body Traits

suggested that they may be much more common than 1 Avian, bat-like, pterodactylian
humanity imagines. Places that would never support 

2 Reptilian, amphibian, draconic
Like life might be teeming with the bizarre offspring 
of Other organisms, unnoticed because human scouts 3 Insectile, beetle-like, spiderish, wasp-like
haven’t bothered to look in such unpromising places. 4 Mammalian, furred or bare-skinned
Many Other species might not even be recognized as 

5 Exotic, composed of some novel substance
life by humanity.

6 Hybrid of two or more types
Alien Biology alien. Such avians might have remarkably good vision 
As a rule of thumb, it’s easiest to make Like aliens some or show unusual talent as pilots thanks to an evolu-
flavor of humanoid. They may have a few extra limbs tionary predilection for thinking in three dimensions.
or somewhat different body geometry, but humanoid Reptilian aliens can range from the classic “liz-
aliens tend to be easier to build and run than those ard man” look to a more subtle combination of 
with drastically different body types. There’s less need pebble-scaled skin, membrane frills, broad bodies, 
to adjust human assumptions about architecture, tech- cold-bloodedness, nictitating membranes, an excep-
nology, and clothing than there would be for a species tional sense of smell, thick claws, powerful builds, 
of six-legged centauroid mothmen. Of course, if you sharp teeth, and fine scales. Bodies may be broad and 
enjoy the prospect of working out the ramifications of thick like that of a lizard, or perhaps sinuous like that 
having four gripping hands and organic wheels, you of a snake. Reptilian aliens might be found especially 
shouldn’t feel shackled to the humanoid shape. on damp, watery worlds, and might be outright am-

Aliens of the Other type can come in any shape or phibious over all or part of their life spans.
size, largely because they aren’t intended to be com- Insectile aliens are usually possessed of chitinous 
prehensible. Their technology and architecture doesn’t “skin” and one or more pairs of compound eyes. Mem-
need to have any link with human conceptions of such; branous wings aren’t unknown, but are probably vesti-
some Others may not even use technology as humans gial and useless on all but the smallest or lightest aliens. 
understand it, but instead manipulate their environ- Insectile aliens might have sucking mouthparts if their 
ment with inborn abilities or subtype-creatures of their primary food source is plant sap- or blood- or might 
own species. Most Other species function as plot de- use chewing mandibles instead for a more solid diet. 
vices in a game, and it’s not necessary to put the same Insectile aliens that function as a hive collective are 
effort into detailing their “biology” if the species aren’t something of a classic trope, but there’s no reason that 
intended to make human sense in the first place. a species can’t instead take after more solitary hunting 

Humanlike aliens are just that; extremely close insects such as beetles or spiders.
to humans in outward appearance. They might have Mammalian aliens might have very human-like 
unusual skin or hair coloration, different hair growth appearances, or they might have fur, muzzles, claws, or 
distributions, an odd number of fingers, cranial ridges, quadrupedal modes of locomotion. Mammalian aliens 
a novel skin texture, variant ear shapes, or different are easy to conceptualize and describe, but if you want 
average body builds or sizes, but they largely appear to play up the alienness of them, you’ll likely need to 
like humans. Xenobiologists postulate that the human make sure they have some dramatic social or cultural 
shape is simply a very successful evolutionary route on difference, or some unique element of physiognomy.
Earth-like planets, and other worlds with similar con- Exotic aliens are built out of parts and materials 
ditions are likely to produce similar sapients. Crank sci- that aren’t normally found in Terran life forms. A hu-
entists tend to favor theories of pan-galactic Creators manoid might be composed out of a kind of organ-
that spread humanlike shapes throughout space; these ic plastic that makes up much of their home planet’s 
theories conspicuously fail to take into account the dra- biochemistry, or be composed of an intricate array of 
matically different DNA and internal organ makeup of interlocking crystals and woody organic elements. You 
many humanlike aliens. should pick one or more materials that aren’t normally 

In general, it’s easiest to pick a particular real-world part of an animal’s body and have them play a major 
type of organism as a basic template for an alien race. role in the alien’s biology. As a consequence, this kind 
The reality of their biology might be totally different, of alien is probably highly dependent upon their home 
but using a terrestrial animal as a basic pattern can help world for food and other biological necessities. If not, 
you fill in details of structure and appearance that can they likely spend a lot of effort synthesizing vital ma-
otherwise be difficult to extemporize. terials out of local supplies.

Avian aliens favor birdlike features. Feathered Hybrid aliens combine aspects of two or more of 
tails, wings, beaks, drastic coloring differences between the types described here, and you can mix and match 
males and females, skin either partially or fully covered their components to create some blend that suits your 
in feathers, hollow bones, and clawed feet and hands purposes. Such hybrids might exist in multiple envi-
are all traits that might be present in an avian-flavored ronments, or be in a transitional evolutionary state.



204• Aliens

Alien Psychology and Lenses Collectivity
There are many different ways to fabricate a useful and These aliens might be hive-like in their social structure, 
interesting alien race, ranging from careful develop- natural communists, or simply very closely attached 
ment based on unique biologies or environments to to the customs and interests of their social group. The 
more abstract methods of defining interesting traits. importance of the individual is thought to be minimal, 
The method this section offers is intended to provide and members will cheerfully and readily sacrifice them-
a GM with a few tools for producing alien races that selves for the good of the group. To willfully refuse to 
feel sufficiently strange in play without leaving the GM accept the consensus of the whole is an unspeakable 
groping to figure out how a given alien would react to sin, and to be separated permanently from one’s social 
a situation. group is a fate worse than death.

The first step is to understand that a Like alien race 
is fundamentally human. They may be shaped differ- Curiosity
ently, they may dwell in a radically different environ- This species is insatiably curious, constantly prying into 
ment, but they think, feel, and desire largely as humans the affairs of those around them. Spying for this race 
do. Human vices and virtues almost certainly exist in carries no opprobrium whatsoever, and while they may 
their society and they are susceptible to the same sort attempt to maintain privacy for certain doings, all as-
of temptations and provocations that move humans. If sume it a given that matters will be discovered in the 
you want to know what an alien is like, the first thing end. They love to explore new places and meet new 
to do is to think of what a human is like. sapients, and while they may be brutally indifferent to 

The difference for aliens, however, is that they are the fates or treatment of these beings, they’re always 
very strongly influenced by one or two emotional or eager to observe them. Their societies tend to operate 
social traits, called Lenses. Everything about them, from in a profoundly transparent manner, and some view 
the way their society is structured to the way they deal the keeping of secrets as an automatic indication of 
with strangers to the dreams they have for their own malicious intent.
future revolves around these Lenses. The result is an 
alien culture that may not be deeply nuanced, but it is Despair
a culture that is very easily remembered by players and These aliens have fallen prey to a pervasive sense of 
easily played by GMs. If you know that the two Lenses failure and loss. Perhaps they are the remnants of a 
for the alien race of Churq are Collectivity and Fear, once-glorious empire or the survivors of some cata-
you know that a given Churq is going to be cowardly clysmic disaster for their people. What they once loved 
and intensely social. Courageous individuality will be has been destroyed, and their sources of comfort and 
noxious or incomprehensible to it and its social roles courage have failed them. Superficially, they might re-
will revolve around the safety of the collective against semble those species that crave pleasure and indulgence, 
the dreadful perils of the outside world. but their disports only serve to numb them to the exis-

Lenses should not be taken as the last word about tential gloom that taints the species. Their leadership 
a species. GMs who want to spend more time on the is desultory at best, and sophisticated social structures 
species’ psychology can elaborate as they wish, and all tend to degrade into loose, diffident associations as 
of the guidelines given for a Lens can be easily adjusted their members no longer have the hope necessary to 
to whatever flavor the GM wishes to use. GMs can pick perpetuate them.
or roll one or more Lenses from among the following 
list, or generate their own as desired. Domination

These aliens are consumed by a desire to conquer and 
d20 Lens d20 Lens rule, both each other and any other species unfortunate 

enough to share the stellar neighborhood. Some among 
1 Collectivity 11 Journeying them can be fair and thoughtful rulers, but others are 
2 Curiosity 12 Joy nothing more than vainglorious tyrants. Among them-

selves, society tends to be organized in intricate and 
3 Despair 13 Pacifism clearly-marked hierarchies, with advancement pro-
4 Domination 14 Pride gressing along both official and illicit routes. These 

aliens constantly test their leaders, forcing them to 
5 Faith 15 Sagacity

maintain their position through strength and cunning.
6 Fear 16 Subtlety
7 Gluttony 17 Tradition Faith

Such a species is driven by religious concerns, organiz-
8 Greed 18 Treachery ing their society around their faith and its clergy. Most 
9 Hate 19 Tribalism such species have a single faith. Others make do with a 

number of different religions, all followed with a fierce 
10 Honor 20 Wrath devotion. Challenges to this faith are not met with 



Aliens •205 

outrage so much as blank incomprehension; for these Honor
beings, the truth of their religions is so self-evident Whatever sort of society the race has, it is one obsessed 
that it seems irrational to ever question it. Those who with honorable behavior. Members will obey the social 
most perfectly embody the teachings of their creeds mores and expectations of their roles at all costs. Per-
tend to become rulers, their lives and will taken as an sonal sacrifice for the sake of upholding these principles 
example for others. earns a member glory and esteem. Gaining advantage 

by means of inappropriate behavior or failing in one’s 
Fear duty is shameful, and an entity that has compromised 
These aliens live in constant fear. They may be natives its honor too greatly may prefer death to continued 
of some lethal death-world, survivors of a species-an- existence.
nihilating cataclysm, or simply evolved from weak and 
easily-devoured prey animals. The world is terrifying Journeying
to them, and their societies are based around hiding This species has an incurable wanderlust. Perhaps they 
or protecting themselves from these dreads. The most roam the stars in fleets of massive spike drive ships, or 
revered members are those who are best hidden or they may make steady circuits of the nearby stars to 
best protected, and who can give protection and con- connect their worlds and exchange people among them. 
cealment to their fellows. Most of these races are quite More technologically primitive species might sail the 
cowardly by human measure, but occasionally they can waves of alien seas or make nomadic journeys across 
be driven into a frenzy of terror in which they fight the continents of their world. Few of these aliens can 
with the courage of the doomed. ever be happy in remaining in one place for long, and 

they are forever scouting new worlds and new lands 
Gluttony simply for the pleasure of being there a little while.
These aliens devour. They are rapacious consumers, 
whether it is of food, living space, energy, or some oth- Joy
er resource. They will do almost anything to increase These aliens are relentless bon vivants, constantly in 
access to this resource and are deeply indifferent to the pursuit of pleasure and enjoyable excitement. Beauty, 
needs of other species, and often of their own fellows grace, and the inspiration of passion are their high-
as well. To consume greatly is glorious for this species, est virtues. Those who produce the most exquisite art 
with the greatest and most respected members being or inspire the most extravagant delight have effective 
those who have the greatest stockpiles of the resource rule over their fellows, though such species tend to be 
to consume, or who provide the most to their followers. loosely-organized at best. The brute necessities of life 
The purpose of existence is to eat, and all good things are acknowledged as a necessity, but their societies are 
are understood as different modes of devouring. willing to sacrifice a great deal of efficiency and practi-

cality for the sake of immediate satisfaction.
Greed
These aliens are enormously greedy. Status depends al- Pacifism
most entirely upon personal wealth, and their lives are The race is remarkably peaceful and nonviolent in 
spent in accumulating the greatest stores of value pos- nature. Few species survive while being totally averse 
sible. Some focus on production, creating the wealth for to violent self-defense, but this race will never choose 
their own benefit, while others seek to make a profit on violence against living creatures as a means of gaining 
trade. Some such greedy species have intricate property advantage or retaliating to wrongs. Among their own 
laws to safeguard what is accumulated, while others kind, violence is abhorrent and unnatural, and it is 
are little more than bandits among their own kind, too probable that the species is either herbivorous or sub-
avaricious to let law interfere with their greed. sists by photosynthesis. A pacifist race may be peace-

ful, but there are more ways to do injury than through 
Hate personal violence; the cession of trade, the destruction 
There is something these aliens hate, and it defines of property, and the incitement of divisions and confu-
their culture completely by their opposition to it. It sion among their enemies are all tools this race knows 
may be these aliens are rampant xenophobes, loath- well. Pacifist species can also be quite oppressive at 
ing all who are not of their own kind. There may be times, with an underclass constitutionally incapable 
acrid religious or political divisions among them, with of defending their possessions or privileges with force.
individuals identifying completely with their sect and 
despising all the others. It could be an ancient enemy Pride
among the stars, a rival race that has wounded them These aliens are suffused with an enormous pride in 
so greatly as to be unforgivable. These aliens may spar their own culture and species, and instinctively consid-
and maneuver for power among their own kind, but all er themselves to be superior to the lesser beings they 
goals and individuals are to some degree subordinated may encounter. A prideful species is not necessarily a 
to the needs of their immortal hate. hostile one; some such races have a certain sense of 



206• Aliens

noblesse oblige toward their “lessers”, and some species’ and doing so in contravention to the past is almost im-
pride shows in a resolute refusal to lower themselves possible for them. Only when faced with a completely 
to deceit, cruelty, or avarice. More often, however, this novel situation is any degree of personal initiative likely 
pride manifests in a casual contempt for the interests of to be shown, and even in that case, the alien will try to 
their inferiors, and a single-minded focus on personal reconcile it to some existing tradition.
advancement and glory among their own kind.

Treachery
Sagacity This species is uniformly treacherous and untrust-
These aliens love intellectual pursuits above all others. worthy. Bargains and agreements are kept only so long 
Logic, wisdom, and erudition are all prized as the best as they are useful to both participants, and truthfulness 
and most glorious expressions of their nature, and their is simply a tool to be placed next to deceit. There is 
rulers are invariably sage-kings of remarkable depth no sense of acrimony or anger among these aliens at 
and breadth of understanding. Such understanding the inevitable betrayals that make up their societies; 
does not necessarily stand in well for good judgment, they consider it good and laudable that an individu-
and sagacious alien civilizations are notorious for over- al should seek its own best interests, and those who 
reaching in their ambitions. Stupidity and ignorance can most perfectly manipulate each other are naturally 
are moral failings to this race, and some of them treat those most worthy to rule, for the health of the society 
very harshly those species that they do not feel to be directly influences the power of its head.
their intellectual peers.

Tribalism
Subtlety The aliens are fiercely tribal, divided up into myriad 
Such a species is enormously cunning and patient in small groups that are as often at war with each other 
character, willing to endure years of suffering calmly as they are cooperating. Such tribes tend to be built 
in order to bring about some intricate plan. They shun along familial lines, though some tribes are volitional in 
open display of emotions or opinions, masking such nature, representing different political or philosophical 
things behind protocols of bland correctness. To reveal groups. A given alien’s loyalty is to its tribe before its 
one’s true opinion about some contentious matter is species, and it is not uncommon for their enemies to 
a mark either of profound trust or a sign of obvious use one group against another.
incipient treachery. The true ruler of such a species is 
almost never who it seems to be. Wrath

The race is hot-tempered, prone to fits of personal vi-
Tradition olence. Disputes are settled by force, though rarely to 
This species devoutly reveres the past and the ways of the point of death among their own kind. Outsiders 
their ancestors. Social interactions are stiffly ritualized, can expect swift and bloody retaliation for any insult 
and society is ornate with the customs, traditions, and or slight, and the prospect of death rarely intimidates 
habits of their forebears. Innovations of any kind are these beings. Their chief mode of emotional expression 
viewed with deep suspicion, and the most favored solu- is anger; wrath at obstacles, fury at enemies, and a slow 
tions to problems are those which have been employed smoldering burn when neither are available.
before. Members of this species are intensely uncom-
fortable when forced to exercise their own judgment, 



Aliens •207 

Alien Social Structure brute strength or traditional esteem. Tribal lead-
Once the Lenses for a species are chosen, you’ll need ers tend to be personally distinguished, and usu-
to establish a few important facts about the aliens. You ally have earned their position through personal 
need to make some decisions about their social struc- accomplishments and the broad support of their 
ture, the goals of their leadership, their relationship tribemates.
with humanity, and the sort of examples that the PCs Oligarchic: The species is led by a number of powerful 
are likely to encounter. or revered figures who work in nominal harmony. 

Determining the social structure for the aliens can Individual oligarchs might have their own goals, 
be done by answering a few basic questions and elabo- but no single member has the strength to enforce 
rating outward from the answers to whatever degree of its will upon the whole. These oligarchs might be 
detail you find useful or enjoyable. In most cases, what- the product of hereditary inheritance, or individ-
ever social structure you hit on will apply only to those ual members of the species might one day aspire 
aliens in a specific sector. Far-flung races might have to join their numbers. 
wildly different modes of rule among their different Multipolar: The species has more than one leadership 
fragments, assuming that biological necessity doesn’t organization. Roll 1d6; on a 1-2 it has two, 3-4 
push them to certain kinds of societies. indicates three, and 5-6 indicates four. Roll on 

First, decide how the species is ruled. You can roll this table the requisite number of times to deter-
randomly on the table below, or simply pick something mine the nature of these organizations. Some such 
that seems appropriate. multipolar institutions operate in parallel; a tribal 

organization headed by one gender, for example, 
d8 Social Structure that determines the division of goods while a 

monarchic head of a different gender makes deci-
1 Democratic sions about the race’s relations with other species. 
2 Monarchic Others are directly in conflict, such as a monarchy 
3 Tribal struggling against a democratic neighbor. 
4 Oligarchic

Once you’ve determined the type of leadership 
5-6 Multipolar Competitive the species favors, you can sort out any important 
7-8 Multipolar Cooperative details about their social structures. By default, you 

should assume that the aliens have some sort of an-
Democratic: The species has a broadly democratic or- alog for any job or role that humans find necessary. 

ganization, with individual members having a The Churq might be cowardly collectivists, but even 
formal say in the choice of leadership. This vot- they need plumbers, soldiers, and tax collectors. You 
ing need not necessarily be based on numbers; it can take whatever human society suits you as the base 
might be a vote with money, military power, re- template and then interpret the relevant roles through 
ligious influence, possession of certain biological the Lenses you’ve picked for the species.
traits, or any other metric that makes sense to the For example, if the Churq have the Lenses of Fear 
aliens. Whatever the specific currency, politics and Collectivism, their tax collectors might be hon-
for this race tends to revolve around persuasion ored exemplars of communal redistribution, judiciously 
and diplomacy rather than use of military force to taking from those who have excess in order to give to 
determine species-wide policies. those who have less. The Churq gladly offer resources 

Monarchic: The species is ruled by a single being, with to the tax collector, because the offering proves that 
such rule justified by custom, biological impera- they producing excess resources, which proves to them 
tive, divine mandate, personal influence, or famil- that they are secure and safe in their plenty. A Churq 
ial ties. Such monarchic societies almost invariably who fails to produce for the collective suffers gnawing 
have a “noble” caste of some kind to act as adminis- terror at the idea of dangerous scarcity and will redou-
trators and officials for the monarch, and they usu- ble its effort to contribute to the group.
ally make up the pool from which new monarchs Conversely, Churq soldiers might invariably be 
are chosen. The specific title for a monarch will found in small groups, as an individual Churq is incapa-
usually depend on the justification for their rule: ble of fighting effectively without the encouragement 
Chieftain, Emperor, Broodmother, High Priest, and safety of their brethren around them. They might 
Dictator, Chief Elder, or so forth. specialize in terror attacks against enemy civilians, their 

Tribal: The species is organized into multiple tribes intimate acquaintance with fear encouraging them to 
based on lineage, philosophy, or geographical lo- use it as a weapon against their enemies… their un-
cation. Tribes set their own laws and policies, and armed, noncombatant enemies, preferably. A war be-
are prone to intense internal struggles over re- tween Churq collectives might never have a single open 
sources and status. There may exist a “paramount battle, but instead a sequence of ambushes and terror 
tribe” that inflicts its will upon the others through attacks until one collective loses its nerve and submits.



208• Aliens

Alien Technology how they treat humans in turn. Some dangerous or 
Alien races tend to come in two different technological obnoxious species might be unable to function in hu-
flavors. Some are quite technologically primitive, either man societies, while others might be normal citizens 
through being too new to sapience to have had time on a sophisticated pan-racial planet. Some beings might 
to develop scientific arts, or because they are unfor- be horrific or repellent to humans through no fault of 
tunate enough to inhabit a very resource-poor world. their own, and subject to persecution by those who 
Such aliens might demonstrate remarkable ingenuity live around their “alien ghettos”. Such aliens are like-
in making the most of their surroundings, but some ly to respond to the misuse much as humans might, 
worlds make advancement prohibitively difficult for albeit in ways strongly influenced by their Lenses. A 
a species. Wrathful species might respond with brutal violence 

Other aliens possess spike drives, advanced weap- toward persecutors, while Joyful ones might try to win 
onry, fusion power, and all the other ornaments of a their tormentors over by demonstrating the beauty and 
sophisticated star-faring civilization. These aliens are delight they can bring to their friends.
usually the remnants of a more expansionistic period, 
colonies and outposts that have evolved into home- Alien Motivation
worlds for the survivors of the civilization. This gold- Individual aliens are likely to have as wide and vary-
en age is normally terminated by some kind of spe- ing a set of motivations as any human. Alien govern-
cies-wide disaster, whether natural in nature or the ments and ruling institutions, however, are liable to 
result of savage internal warfare. These worlds are have more specific goals. Acquiring a new homeworld, 
usually too absorbed in their own affairs or ennui to ensuring the suppression of would-be pogromchiks, 
have much interest in expansion. vengeance against a hated world or species, or any oth-

Most advanced aliens have tech roughly equivalent er such long-term goal would be suitable for an alien 
to human TL4, though they’re often slightly superior government.
in some areas while being somewhat worse in others. The broad goals of an alien government are usually 
A few old, sophisticated races have the equivalent of obvious, but the subtle plans and maneuvers they use to 
TL5, though these species often produce devices and accomplish these purposes can be less clear. PC groups 
artifacts that are difficult for humans to use effectively. can be commissioned by alien officials to perform acts 
A handful of alien worlds show technology that is sim- or retrieve objects that have no immediate relevance, 
ply impossible for humanity to replicate at any known only to discover later that they played a crucial role in 
tech level, with artifices and creations that seem more some enigmatic gambit. By the same token, they might 
magic than mundane science. stumble across some alien operation that has no obvi-

ous purpose, earning bitter enmity for their disruption 
Aliens in the Sector of plans they never knew existed.
What role do these aliens play in the sector? Do they In either case, there should usually be some way 
have their own sector homeworld, dominated by them for the PCs to discover alien motivations, in the case 
and their kind, or do they instead live in enclaves on that they actually care. It can be prohibitively difficult 
a human-ruled world? Do they live in orbital habitats, to negotiate with such beings without understanding 
or convoys of massive spike drive ships? You should their desires, and parties with little appetite for combat 
place the species according to your needs, preferably in may be frustrated if they find their would-be count-
a location that the players can be expected to eventually er-parties acting in an impenetrably obscure way. Some 
experience. adventures might revolve heavily around the challenge 

You should also make a few quick decisions about of understanding an alien power’s true goals and the 
how these aliens are generally treated by humans, and steps they’re willing to take to achieve them.



Alien Player Characters •209 

Alien Player Characters

If a GM decides to allow players to play members of an Origin Skill
alien race, she’s going to need to do a little extra work. All members of the species are particularly good at 
Each alien race is represented by a focus; to become something. They might all be capable warriors, have 
a member of that race, the player spends their initial unique technical aptitude, be persuasive speakers, or 
focus pick on choosing that origin. They then get the otherwise have a shared knack. Receive an appropriate 
natural benefits of belonging to that alien species. skill as a bonus. Warrior-type races might be allowed 

As a general rule, the GM should pick two of the to pick from either Punch, Shoot, or Stab.
following benefits to make up an alien’s origin focus, or 
three if a couple of them are relatively minor perks. If Psychic Aptitude
the Vree-Tak are a Proud Warrior Race of aliens, they These aliens are all psychically gifted. The PC must 
might have both an Aptitude for Violence, for example, either be a Psychic or take the Partial Psychic class op-
and an Origin Skill related to combat. tion from the Adventurer class. Their maximum Effort 

It’s also possible to apply particular weaknesses to score is increased by one point.
an alien species as compared to a human baseline. Such 
weaknesses are rarely a significant game-balance con- Shapeshifting
sideration for PCs, however, as it’s common for players The alien is either an amoeboid blob that can ma-
to choose such alien races and then select classes and nipulate objects with extruded pseudopods and flow 
roles that are unhindered by the species’ flaws. If you through small spaces, or it can actually mimic other 
want to use a flaw as a game-balance tool in a species, species or objects. The former trait is a minor benefit 
make sure it’s broad enough to hinder a wide range of at best, but the latter one might be sufficient to mimic 
concepts, and not just disqualify a few roles. biopsionic shapeshifting, or might have a more restrict-

ed range of possible shapes.
Aptitude for Violence
All members of this species are good at hurting things. Strong Attribute
They gain a +1 bonus to their normal attack bonus. All members of the species are strong, fast, tough, clev-
Thus, a 1st level alien Expert would have an attack bo- er, perceptive, or charming by human standards. Pick 
nus of +1 instead of +0, and a 1st level Warrior would an attribute appropriate to the alien; that attribute 
begin with a +2 bonus. gains a +1 bonus to its modifier, up to a maximum of 

+3. Thus, an alien from an exceptionally strong species 
Environmental Native with a Strength score of 10 would have a Strength mod-
As a minor perk, the alien is able to survive in a relative- ifier of +1 instead of +0.
ly common hostile environment, such as underwater, 
in hard vacuum, amid lethal radiation, or so forth. If the Tough
alien requires this environment, it’s no net benefit at all. The alien is big, or hardy, or made of unusually durable 

biological components. Whenever they roll their hit 
Innate Ability dice to determine their maximum hit points, the first 
All members of this species have one or more natural die they roll always counts as the maximum. Thus, a 
abilities beyond those possessed by humans. Perfect vi- first level Warrior alien would always start with 8 hit 
sion in the dark, tracking by scent, wireless tech inter- points. When rolling hit points at second level, they’d 
facing, a lack of need for food and water, or some other count their first die as 8 and roll on from there. Further 
talent might apply. As a quick inspiration, you can look hit dice that roll a 1 are rerolled.
at the equipment or cyberware list and give them the 
natural use of 2-3 items. Optionally, you might give Unusual Movement Mode
them an ability equivalent to a single psionic technique, The alien can fly under normal gravity conditions, or 
plus one point of Effort to fuel it if needed. make short-range teleportation hops, or can climb 

sheer walls as if they were flat. Whatever the details, 
Natural Defenses they can use their Move action to travel unusually.
The creature has a hard shell or sharp talons. The alien 
has a base Armor Class of 15 plus half their character Useful Immunity
level, rounded up. If you give them body weaponry The alien is impervious to some threat that’s relatively 
such as claws or fangs, have it equivalent to a medi- common. A significant or common immunity, such as 
um advanced weapon. Weaponry alone is a very small against bullets, lasers, edged melee weapons or the like 
advantage, since it’s so easy to acquire otherwise, so would be a major benefit, while immunity to minor 
you might not count this as a benefit if all you give a threats such as toxins, diseases, radiation, or falling 
creature is a sharp set of teeth. damage might only qualify as a minor perk.






FACTIONS
Interstellar merchant combines, tyrannical planetary slow-burn struggle between a militant terrorist group 
empires, sinister cults of eugenic perfection… groups with fanatical zealots for an asset and a eugenics-loving 
such as these all have a role to play in Stars Without religion with a crack team of lawyers, they’re going to 
Number. Such organized, motivated groups are known think somewhat harder about how these two factions 
as factions, and this chapter describes ways in which a might play out their conflict, and will get results that 
GM can use them to further events in a sector. Player don’t automatically feed their assumptions.
characters that attain sufficient power and fame might One of the easiest ways to use the faction system 
even establish their own factions, and the rules below is as a news chyron for your campaign. After each fac-
give ways to handle inter-faction fighting and the ad- tion turn, you can boil down events to a few sentences 
vancement of each group’s goals. apiece and hand them to your players at the start of the 

next gaming session, letting them know what’s on the 
Using Factions in Your Game news channels and underground gossip boards of your 
The faction system in Stars Without Number is intended campaign. If your players get excited about one of the 
to provide a GM with a constant stream of background events, you can dedicate the next downtime between 
activity, adventure hooks, and visible setting reactions sessions to brewing up an adventure related to their 
to PC actions. It is an optional system, one that a GM efforts at involvement.
can take or leave as their own campaign suggests, but Another use of the system is as a way to formalize 
it can provide an interested GM with tools to simplify the setting reaction to PC actions. If the last adven-
the business of running the campaign’s background. ture involved the PCs utterly discrediting the leader 

The faction system is not meant to be a stand- of a political party you’re using as a faction, you might 
alone game that doesn’t require GM involvement. It’s scratch off the Demagogue asset that the party had that 
not balanced for equivalence between sides, isn’t de- represented that leader. A quick scribble gives you the 
signed to incentivize optimal play choices, and some news crawl next session telling the PCs that the leader 
situations will certainly require a GM to referee them. had decided to step down to spend more time with 
The system is, however, built to produce the kind of her family.
output that a working GM is likely to find most useful. The factions you write up are not the only organi-

Some GMs will have no use for a formalized fac- zations and groups in your world, but they are the ones 
tion system. These people feel most comfortable sim- the PCs are most likely to care about or the ones most 
ply dictating the outcome of conflicts and ambitions pertinent to their current activities. You don’t need to 
among the assorted groups and organizations in their keep the same factions active all the time; if the cam-
campaign. When two groups clash, the results will be paign shifts focus halfway across the sector, you can 
determined by what the GM thinks is most reasonable. simply freeze the local factions until the PCs get back in 

This is a perfectly valid way of doing things, and their zone of relevance. If you have the spare time and 
indeed, when a GM decides how some off-stage orga- effort, you might even keep them running, letting the 
nization interacts with a fully-statted faction they’re PCs discover how things shook out when and if they 
going to have to make calls like that anyway. Yet the ever get back to that region of space.
disadvantages of such a method are twofold. In time, the PCs themselves can start creating their 

First, it lacks surprise for the GM. By definition, own factions to contend with rivals and seek influence 
the reasonable thing always happens, and even the on a scale impractical for a lone wanderer. While PC 
occasional randomizer tossed in produces results that factions use all the same rules and faction turn actions 
are to some degree predictable to the GM. History and as NPC ones, they have the tremendous advantage of 
current affairs are full of wildly unlikely-seeming out- being the focus of a veteran adventuring party’s helpful 
comes, however, and sometimes the GM can benefit interest. Almost anything that can be accomplished by 
by seeing a genuinely shocking result percolate out of faction turn actions can be done more quickly by the 
some conflict. Even in the absence of the adventure appropriate PC adventures.
hooks such surprises create, not knowing exactly how This, of course, is an easy way for a GM to let the 
her campaign is going to shake out helps keep a GM players write their own adventure content. So long as 
interested in events. the PCs care about their pet factions or allied groups, 

Second, an unstructured system has few prompts their own ambitions and desire to help will practically 
to goad a GM into thinking of unexpected interactions create whole sessions worth of adventure outlines for 
between factions. A GM simply provided with a list of you. Important NPCs in rival groups will become hated 
NPC groups to write events for will tend to reach for nemeses, hostile assets will become the targets of their 
the interactions and outcomes that are foremost in their bad intent, and the players will constantly be on the 
mind, implicitly going along with assumptions about lookout for ways to augment their allies. For the sake 
how things should play out. If instead they’re handed a of your own time and effort, you should let them.



212• Factions, Assets, and Turns

Factions, Assets, and Turns

A faction is any group that you intend to use as an im- accustomed to military reasoning. Governments tend 
portant actor in the sector. In theory, any organization to have high Force ratings to represent police forces 
could qualify as a faction; every planetary government, and military structures. Terrorist groups, mercenary 
business, religion, or club could be described with the bands, and other organizations that rely on brute vio-
rules given here. Still, that kind of exhaustive catalog- lence also tend to have high Force ratings.
ing is neither practical nor profitable. Faction status Cunning rating reflects the faction’s skills at es-
should be reserved for those organizations that will do pionage, infiltration, internal security, and covert 
things important to the PCs or the background world. manipulation of other groups. A rating of 1 implies a 
You should not bother creating more factions for your completely visible faction with no resources for resist-
game than you are actually using at that moment. Save ing infiltration, while a rating of 8 implies a faction of 
your effort for the groups that count. Illuminati unknown to all but a handful of paranoid 

It may be necessary to turn an organization into a conspiracy-mongers with tendrils of influence reach-
faction in the course of play. If the PCs suddenly take a ing to the farthest star in the sector. Eugenics cults, ter-
deep interest in a eugenic cult they recently faced on the rorist groups, spy agencies, and some religious groups 
jungle moon of Perihelion, it might be useful for the tend to favor a good Cunning score.
GM to turn the group into a formal faction, the better Wealth rating indicates the faction’s commercial, 
to understand how the PCs might injure it and what scientific, and industrial resources. A Wealth score of 
resources the cult might have to fight back. Or it might 1 means that the faction has little in the way of income 
be that the PC group’s interstellar trading cartel faction or investments, no dedicated manufacturing facilities, 
tries to topple a world’s tyrannical government, thus and no laboratories or researchers available. A Wealth 
making it worthwhile to define the tyrant’s resources. score of 8 is appropriate for some system-spanning 

As a general rule, you shouldn’t have more than merchant empire or the combine that runs the pretech 
five or six factions at the start of your campaign, and manufactories of an untouched factory world.
fewer is quite possible. Fewer than three tend to make FacCreds are a measure of the faction’s general 
for too much stability, however, and might not gen- wealth and resources, spent to purchase and main-
erate enough activity to make for interesting news tain assets or carry out faction operations. A FacCred 
reports and adventure hooks. Possible factions in a doesn’t necessarily represent a certain sum of credits so 
campaign might include criminal groups, local reli- much as it represents logistics capability, available re-
gions, planetary governments, political movements, sources, and managerial focus. A faction on a primitive 
terrorist organizations, noble houses, or any other world may not have a single credit to its name, but its 
band that might conceivably be someone the players command of a legion of laborers and the food supplies 
care about or some group that might possibly hire or necessary to feed them are a vast store of FacCreds all 
oppose the PCs. the same. All the credits in a sector do no good if they 

can’t be effectively translated into a useful asset.
Defining a Faction Factions also accumulate experience points. They 
Factions have attributes consisting of six statistics, a gain these points from accomplishing goals, with the 
homeworld, and one or more tags. larger goals earning them correspondingly more expe-

Hit points measure a faction’s cohesion, morale, rience points. Once enough experience is accumulated 
and group unity. The higher a faction’s hit points, the the faction can spend it to improve a rating. The higher 
harder it is to break it up. A faction that loses hit points the rating, the more experience is necessary to raise it. 
has lost cohesion somehow, either through the death It’s vastly more difficult to go from Force 7 to 8 than 
of leadership, the demoralization of members, or the from Force 1 to 2.
rise of fractious power blocs inside its structure. A fac- The faction’s homeworld represents the location 
tion needs time to recover from hit point damage. A of its core leadership and support. Factions can always 
faction’s maximum hit points are based on its Force, purchase assets and take actions on their homeworld, 
Cunning, and Wealth, as given later in the chapter. even if they lack any other assets there. By the same 

Force rating is the faction’s general aptitude at ap- token, an enemy can always launch attacks against the 
plying physical violence, measured on a scale ranging faction on their homeworld if the enemy is able to 
from 1 to 8. A rating of 1 implies an organization with move in its own assets.
little or no aptitude for physical coercion, while a rating Tags are special traits that relate to the faction’s 
of 8 might be appropriate for a regional hegemon with nature or special aptitudes. A cabal of rebel conspira-
a powerful, expansionist military. A high Force rating tors might have the Secretive tag, which gives a bonus 
doesn’t necessarily mean that the faction has much in to resisting certain attacks, or Deep Roots, which gives 
the way of a standing army, but it does mean that the them a bonus to operations on their homeworld. Most 
faction can think clearly about the use of force and is factions have one or two tags.



Factions, Assets, and Turns •213 

Faction Assets The Faction Turn
Aside from the six statistics, faction also possess assets. Faction actions are divided up by turns. As a rule of 
Assets are facilities, contacts, trained units of specialists, thumb, a faction turn happens once per month, or once 
or other specific objects, places, or groups of value. A after each adventure. Turns might happen more or less 
regiment of postech infantry is an asset, as is a pretech often depending on the GM’s preferred pace of events. 
manufactory, a master assassin, or an interstellar ship- Each faction can usually take one action per turn.
ping company. At the beginning of each turn, roll a die that’s no 

Assets require certain ratings to support. A fleet smaller than the number of factions you have. Thus, if 
of capital warships isn’t going to be useful to a faction you’ve got six factions in the sector, roll a d6. If you’ve 
with Force 3 no matter how much wealth the faction got nine, roll a d10, and so forth. Whatever number 
has. It just doesn’t have the infrastructure and institu- comes up is the faction that acts first; thus, if you roll 
tional mindset to use such an asset effectively. a 4, the fourth faction on your list acts first. Then the 

Assets have hit points much like factions do. An as- one after it, and the one after that, and so forth, rolling 
set reduced to zero hit points by an attack is destroyed; over the top of the list when necessary.
either physically ruined, hopelessly scattered, totally At the beginning of each turn, a faction gains Fac-
demoralized, or lost to a rival buyer. Asset hit points Creds equal to half their Wealth rating rounded up plus 
can be regained with time for repair, reorganization, or one-quarter of their total Force and Cunning ratings, 
culling members suborned by other powers. rounded down. Any maintenance costs must be paid 

Assets have a purchase cost and sometimes a main- at the beginning of each turn. Assets that cannot be 
tenance cost, paid in FacCreds. The first turn that a maintained are unusable; an asset that goes without 
faction fails to pay the maintenance cost of an asset, it maintenance for two consecutive rounds is lost. A fac-
becomes unavailable for use. If the maintenance cost tion cannot voluntarily choose not to pay maintenance.
isn’t paid the next turn, the asset is lost. If a faction has no goal at the start of a turn, they 

Assets often have an Attack. When an asset is used may pick a new one. If they wish to abandon a prior 
to strike at another faction, the attack entry is used to goal, they may do so, but the demoralization and con-
determine what rating is attacked and the amount of fusion costs them that turn’s FacCred income and they 
hit point damage that is done by a successful hit. An may perform no other action that turn.
asset without an Attack entry can’t be used to initiate At the end of each faction turn, the GM should 
a strike at an enemy faction. translate the turn’s events into a few lines of rumor or 

A Counterattack line indicates the damage an asset news that can be related to the PCs. A successful attack 
does to an unsuccessful attacker. If an attacking asset by the Lawyers of the Bright Dawn Guild on the Peri-
misses its strike against the target, the target’s Counter- helion government’s Union Toughs might be reported 
attack entry damage is done. An asset without a Coun- as “Neohuman rights activists on Perihelion applaud 
terattack entry does no damage to a failed attacker. It’s the election of Parminder Smith to the leadership of the 
quite possible to have an asset with no Attack but a government-sponsored Transit Workers Union. Miss 
powerful Counterattack, making it useless at offense Smith is a strong supporter of neohuman research and 
but very dangerous to assault. legal emancipation.”

Assets have a type, such as “Special Forces”, “Mil-
itary Unit”, “Facility”, “Starship” or the like. This type Acting During A Turn
is mostly relevant when factions wish to upgrade an Factions can take several different types of actions, 
asset, or some special tag applies only to assets of a though generally only one action per turn. The list 
certain type. provided consists of the usual actions a faction might 

Assets have a location, usually the planet on which find useful; you should feel free to allow variations on 
they were purchased, though it might also be a deep- the list depending on the particular situation. PC ad-
space habitat, a particular moon, or some other general ventures always exist outside of the faction turn econ-
geographical location. Assets cannot be used against omy. If you run an adventure involving the PC group’s 
different locations unless they are first transported destruction of the Sorority of the Golden Flame’s secret 
there, usually by means of a logistical asset. laboratories on a volcanic planetoid, then the faction’s 

Most assets also require a particular tech level to asset is simply destroyed, with no chance of resisting.
purchase. They can be transported to worlds with low- A faction can only take one type of action per round, 
er tech levels, but they must be purchased on a planet but they can perform that action on as many worlds as 
with a sufficient level of technology. they wish. A faction that selects the Attack action, for 

A faction may own no more assets of a particular example, can launch attacks on multiple worlds, while 
type than they have points in the relevant rating. Thus, one that selects the Use Asset Ability action can use the 
a faction with Force 3 can own three Force assets. In a special abilities of any or all assets they possess. This 
pinch, a faction can exceed this total, but each asset over limit on the type of action allowed in a round tends 
the maximum costs an additional FacCred in mainte- to slow down events, allowing for the more gradual 
nance each turn. development of situations in play.



214• Faction Actions

Faction Actions

The following list of actions includes the most com- has no Counterattack line, the attacker suffers no 
mon activities a faction might choose to perform. The consequences for the failed attack.
GM should feel free to add new action types, or allow A tie on the roll results in both Attack and 
alternate choices if a faction wishes to do something Counterattack succeeding. Both attacker and de-
that doesn’t quite fit the list below. As a rule, a faction fender take damage as indicated.
should only be able to do one thing per turn, but should Buy Asset: The faction buys one asset on their home-
be able to do that same thing with any or all assets. world or another planet on which they have a 

Base of Influence. These assets take time to as-
Attack: Attacking is the chief way by which a faction semble, and can neither attack, defend, nor grant 

assaults a rival’s assets and organizational struc- their special benefits until the beginning of the 
ture. A successful attack can damage or destroy an faction’s next turn. The faction must have a suf-
enemy asset, or even damage the leadership and ficient rating to buy an asset, and the planet must 
cohesion of an enemy faction. It’s up to the GM have a tech level sufficient to support the asset’s 
or players to describe an attack and its methods. creation. Only one asset can be purchased by a 

Attacks can only be launched against known faction per turn.
assets. If a rival has stealthed assets on a world, Change Homeworld: A faction can move to a different 
they cannot be targeted for an attack until they’ve homeworld, if they have a Base of Influence on 
been discovered by a faction’s intelligence agents. the destination planet. This action takes one turn, 
Attacks can only be launched against assets on the plus one more for each hex of distance between 
same world as the attacker. the old homeworld and the new. During this time 

To launch an attack, the attacker selects one the faction can initiate no actions.
or more of their own assets and targets a rival fac- Expand Influence: The faction buys a Base of Influence 
tion with assets on the same world. One at a time, asset on a planet on which they have at least one 
each attacking asset is matched against a defending other asset. The faction then rolls 1d10+Cunning 
asset chosen by the defender. Each attacking asset rating against similar rolls by every other faction 
can attack only once per turn, though a defending on the planet. Any of the others that equal or 
asset can defend as many times as the defender beat the faction’s roll may make a free immedi-
wishes, assuming it can survive multiple conflicts. ate Attack action against the Base of Influence if 

Once matched, the attacker rolls 1d10 and they wish. Other assets present on the planet may 
adds the relevant attribute for the asset. For exam- defend against the attack as normal. The Base of 
ple, a military unit’s Attack might add the faction’s Influence cannot be used until the beginning of 
Force rating to the attack roll, while a cyberninja the faction’s next turn.
unit might add the faction’s Cunning to the attack To buy a Base of Influence, the purchaser pays 
roll. The defender then rolls 1d10 and adds the one FacCred for every hit point the base has, up 
attribute that the attack targets. In the instance of to a maximum equal to the faction’s maximum 
the military unit, this might be an attack against hit points. Bases with few hit points are relatively 
Force, causing the defender to add their Force peripheral outposts, easy to dislodge but cheap to 
rating to the roll, while defending against the erect. Bases with many hit points are significant 
cyberninjas might require adding the defender’s strongholds that would hurt the faction badly to 
Cunning rating. The Attack line of the attacking lose but are much harder to eliminate.
asset indicates which attribute to add to the attack Factions may use this action to buy additional 
roll and which to add to the defense roll. hit points for a Base of Influence, paying one addi-

If the attacker’s roll exceeds the defender’s roll, tional FacCred up to the maximum HP allowed. It 
the attack is a success. The defending asset suffers is possible to decrease a base’s hit points with the 
damage as given on the Attack line of the attacking action as well, albeit without refunds. The base on 
asset. If the defender has a Base of Influence on the a faction’s homeworld cannot be shrunk this way.
world, the defender may opt to let the damage by- Refit Asset: Change one asset to any other asset of the 
pass the asset and hit the Base of Influence instead, same type. If the new asset is of a more expensive 
causing damage to it and the faction hit points. If type, pay the difference. The asset must be on a 
the asset or Base of Influence is reduced to zero planet that allows the purchase of the new asset. 
hit points, it is lost. Turning a militia squad into elite skirmishers 

If the attacker’s roll is less than the defender’s requires a tech level 4 world and governmental 
roll, the attack fails. The defending asset can apply permission, for example. A refitted asset is un-
whatever damage their Counterattack line indi- able to attack or defend until the beginning of the 
cates to the attacking asset. If the defending asset faction’s next turn.



Faction Actions •215 

Repair Asset/Faction: Heal damage to an asset or faction. Locations are considered general to a specific star 
For one FacCred, an asset heals points of damage system rather than a particular world. The faction’s 
equal to the faction’s score in its ruling attribute. marketers might be operating out of the planetary cap-
More damage can be healed in this single action, ital, but for purposes of location, they’re as much in the 
but the cost of repair increases by one FacCred system as a Scavenger Fleet floating around the rim. 
for each further amount repaired- two FacCreds Getting shuttles to and from wherever they need to go 
for the second amount healed, three FacCreds for inside the system is not a problem for most factions.
the third amount healed, et cetera. If used to heal Sometimes two factions will want to merge for 
a faction, the faction regains hit points equal to some reason. The efficiency of this will depend on how 
the rounded average of its highest and lowest at- much the factions like each other and how close they 
tribute ratings. This healing cannot be hurried by are in function; give this propinquity a rating from 1, 
additional spending. Use of this action allows the for two factions that hate each other and don’t do simi-
faction to heal as many different assets as it wishes. lar things at all, to 9, for two factions that are in perfect 

Sell Asset: Gain half the FacCred cost of the asset, synchrony. Use 6 for two factions of average similarity. 
rounded down. Whenever you need to see how well the merger went, 

Seize Planet: The faction seeks to become the ruling roll a compatibility check; 1d10 versus this number. If 
body of a world. The faction must destroy all the roll is equal or less, it worked, and if it’s higher, the 
unstealthed assets on the planet belonging to fac- merger didn’t work so well in that regard.
tions who oppose their attempt before they can Now determine the Force, Wealth, and Cunning 
successfully take control. If all the assets cannot be ratings for the new faction. For each one, roll a com-
destroyed in one turn, the faction must continue patibility check; on a success, use the higher of the two 
the attempt next turn until either successful or all factions’ scores, while on a failure, use the lower one.
of their own assets on that planet have been de- For each asset, roll a compatibility check; on a suc-
stroyed or have left the planet. No other actions cess, the asset belongs to the new faction, on a failure, 
can be taken in the meanwhile. Once all resistance it’s forcibly sold. FacCreds are totaled between the two 
has been crushed, the attacker must maintain at factions, and the merged faction gets all the Bases of 
least one unstealthed asset on the world for three Influence each originally had. Pick a new goal as well. 
turns. If successful, they gain the Planetary Govern- If the faction has assets its new ratings can’t support, it 
ment tag for the world. keeps them, but can’t use Repair Asset on them.

Use Asset Ability: Use the special abilities of one or PC adventures always overrule faction die rolls. 
more assets, such as the transport ability of logis- If the PCs undertake an adventure which results in 
tics assets, or the intelligence-gathering abilities the crippling or destruction of a hostile faction’s asset, 
of spy assets. that asset is destroyed without any need for dice. In 

the same vein, if they swoop in to rescue some asset 
Handling Special Cases that the dice declared was ruined and undertake an ad-
When in doubt, a GM should simply make a judgment venture that plausibly salvages the situation, that asset 
based on their own best sense of the situation. Despite comes back into existence. The faction system is built 
this general case, there are a few more particular situ- to help create adventure hooks, not shut them down.
ations that come up often enough to bear some specific By the same token, if a PC adventure seems to 
guidance in handling them. plausibly create an asset for a faction, then that should 

Sometimes, a ground unit will choose to attack be credited to the group. It is entirely in your interest 
a starship unit, or some other unit that seems to be as a GM to let the players plot out adventure goals and 
beyond their reach. As a general rule, you should allow find motivation in helping a faction. Every adventure 
this, and simply decide how it was that the ground unit they spend helping or harming a faction is one more 
was able to cause problems for the starships. Maybe hook of engagement with the campaign world and one 
they subverted officers, or sabotaged support facilities, less adventure idea you need to come up with.
or drove logistical suppliers out of business. If your factions are too quiet with a lack of inter-

Some assets require the permission of the plane- esting conflict among them, don’t hesitate to create that 
tary government to raise them on a particular world or conflict. A sector full of turtling factions that hide out 
move them into that world’s system. The necessity of and painstakingly build their resources doesn’t make 
this will depend on how advanced the planetary gov- for much engagement, so insert a personal grudge or 
ernment is and how direct the contact. A TL2 planetary add a gold-rush opportunity.
government probably wouldn’t even notice the arrival When a faction buys an asset, they are not neces-
of a capital fleet in their star system, let alone be able sarily creating something ex nihilo. They might have 
to do anything to prevent it. Even so, native lawyers, always had that particular resource, but are only now 
bribed offworlder officials, and hired mercenaries mobilizing it effectively. A planetary government with 
might still be able to harass a force the locals couldn’t no military assets doesn’t necessarily lack an army, it 
bar from entering their territory. just lacks an army that is useful to its current goals.



216• Buying and Using Assets

Buying and Using Assets

Assets can be normally purchased on any world that has 
a Base of Influence and sufficient tech level to support Bases of Influence
their creation. In a few cases, however, acquiring an Bases of Influence are special assets, and use certain 
asset requires more than just FacCreds and a planet. special rules. A faction cannot buy assets on a world 

Starship-type assets cannot be purchased on a without a Base of Influence, though it can move assets 
world with less than several hundred thousand inhab- purchased elsewhere onto the planet, and it can always 
itants unless they can explain how the ships are being buy assets on its homeworld even if its Base of Influ-
provided or supported by another power. Planets with ence there is destroyed. Of course, that assumes it still 
very small populations lack such major infrastructure. has a Base of Influence somewhere else.

Some assets require the permission of a planetary First, a faction can only ever have one Base of In-
government in order to purchase them or move them fluence on a world at a time. Bases of Influence cannot 
onto the planet. This is not a formality; the standing be moved once in place. Bases of Influence cannot be 
government’s forces can physically disrupt any attempt purchased with a Buy Asset action. They can only be 
to recruit the asset on their world, or shoot it down in put in place with an Expand Influence action. Bases of 
its vulnerable entry phase. Whether or not this permis- Influence have a sale value of zero FacCreds.
sion will be extended will usually depend on the fac- The cost of a Base of Influence is equal to its max-
tion’s relationship with a planet’s government, though imum hit points, which can be up to the owning fac-
bribes of 1d4 FacCreds can occasionally suffice. Under tion’s maximum hit points. Bases of Influence do not 
no conditions will a government willingly permit the count against a faction’s maximum assets.
entry of assets powerful enough to overthrow them. Damage done to a Base of Influence is also done 

Planetary governments cannot prevent the land- directly to a faction’s hit points. If a Base of Influence 
ing of assets without the permission-needed quality. is brought below zero hit points, the overflow damage 
Such assets are too unthreatening and nondescript to is not counted against the owning faction’s hit points.
alert them until after they’ve already been formed or As a consequence, a faction must decide how heav-
have landed. Of course, there is nothing stopping them ily to invest in a particular Base of Influence. A minor 
from attacking these assets either directly or indirectly foothold on a world consisting of a base with few hit 
should they feel threatened. points is cheap and risks limited harm to the faction 

Only one asset can be purchased per turn by a should it be destroyed, but it’s also more vulnerable to 
given faction, and assembling it takes time. The asset being wiped out by a rival group.
can neither attack, defend, nor give any special benefits It’s quite possible for a faction to be effectively 
until the beginning of the buyer’s next turn. destroyed by smashing enough heavily-invested Bases 

of Influence on other worlds. While the homeworld’s 
Using Faction Assets Base might be in perfect condition, the faction has so 
As its action for the turn, a faction can choose to use the badly overextended itself in failed expansion that it 
special actions of one or more assets. They can trigger can no longer sustain itself as a going concern. The 
these special abilities in any order, but each form of as- resources and personnel that the homeworld needed 
set must be used all at the same time; you cannot trigger to import are no longer available, and the credits and 
Heavy Drop Assets to move a Monopoly asset onto a effort spent on the now-destroyed Bases are wasted. 
world, activate the Monopoly ability to siphon cash, The backlash from this can be ruinous to any faction.
and then use another Heavy Drop Asset to move the Every faction also has a homeworld. A homeworld 
Monopoly back offworld. All Heavy Drop Assets must is always automatically equipped with a Base of Influ-
be finished before Monopolies can be triggered, and ence with maximum hit points. If a faction moves its 
so forth. Unless specified otherwise, all asset targets homeworld to a planet that already has a Base of Influ-
must be in the same stellar system with the acting assets. ence, the base on the new homeworld has its hit points 

In some cases, assets are called to make a test set to the maximum possible and the homeworld’s Base 
against another faction, such as a Cunning vs. Wealth of Influence swaps in the hit point value that the des-
test. For these tests, the acting asset’s faction rolls 1d10 tination world’s base originally had.
and adds their score in the acting attribute, while the 
target faction rolls 1d10 and adds their score in the de-
fending attribute. If the actor rolls higher than the de-
fender, the action is successful. Certain tags may grant 
a faction extra dice for these rolls, in which case the 
highest d10 out of those rolled is used. These tests do 
not count as attacks, and no damage or counterattacks 
are triggered.



Faction Goals •217 

Faction Goals

Factions usually have motivations and goals beyond Invincible Valor: Destroy a Force asset with a mini-
simple existence. To grow, a faction needs to accom- mum purchase rating higher than your faction’s 
plish goals that are in line with their leadership’s pur- Force rating. Thus, if your Force is 3, you need to 
poses. Successful achievement of these goals helps the destroy a unit that requires Force 4 or higher to 
faction grow in strength and influence. purchase. Difficulty 2.

A faction can pursue one goal at a time. Once a goal Wealth of Worlds: Spend FacCreds equal to four times 
is successfully attained, the faction may select a new your faction’s Wealth rating on bribes and influ-
one at the beginning of their next turn or delay until a ence. This money is effectively lost, but the goal 
good opportunity arises. If a faction chooses to aban- is then considered accomplished. The faction’s 
don a goal, the demoralizing effect of it and the waste Wealth rating must increase before this goal can 
of preparations costs them that turn’s FacCred income, be selected again. Difficulty 2.
and they cannot perform any other action that turn.

A faction that successfully accomplishes a goal Raising Faction Stats
gains experience points equal to the goal’s difficulty. Faction attributes can be raised at the beginning of 
This experience may be saved, or spent at the beginning each turn, if enough experience points are available. 
of any turn to increase the Force, Cunning, or Wealth The cost of raising a faction attribute rises as the rating 
ratings of a faction. Optionally, the GM might allow a rises. As a faction’s ratings improve, it becomes harder 
faction to buy a new tag if their deeds justify it. to destroy, and gains additional maximum hit points.

It’s the GM’s choice as to what might constitute The maximum hit points of a faction are equal to 4 
an appropriate goal for a faction, but below are some plus the experience point cost of the highest attributes 
potential goals and the difficulties attached to each. in Force, Cunning, and Wealth they have attained. 

For example, a faction with Force 3, Cunning 2, and 
Military Conquest: Destroy a number of Force assets of Wealth 2 has a maximum hit point total of 4 + 4 + 2 

rival factions equal to your faction’s Force rating. + 2 = 12 hit points. A brand-new faction with Force 1, 
Difficulty is 1/2 number of assets destroyed. Cunning 2, and Wealth 1 has a maximum hit point total 

Commercial Expansion: Destroy a number of Wealth of 4 + 1 + 2 + 1 = 8 hit points.
assets of rival factions equal to your faction’s Experience points spent by factions differ from 
Wealth rating. Difficulty is 1/2 number of assets those gained by PCs in that they are lost when they in-
destroyed. crease an attribute. Once a faction spends 4 XP to raise 

Intelligence Coup: Destroy a number of Cunning assets Force from 2 to 3, for example, those points are lost, 
of rival factions equal to your faction’s Cunning and 6 more must be spent to raise Force from 3 to 4.
rating. Difficulty is 1/2 number of assets destroyed.

Planetary Seizure: Take control of a planet, becoming Rating XP Cost Hit Point Value
the legitimate planetary government. Difficulty 
equal to half the average of the current ruling 1 - 1
faction’s Force, Cunning, and Wealth ratings. If 2 2 2
the planet somehow lacks any opposing faction to 3 4 4
resist the seizure, it counts as Difficulty 1.

4 6 6
Expand Influence: Plant a Base of Influence on a new 

planet. Difficulty 1, +1 if the attempt is contested 5 9 9
by a rival faction. 6 12 12

Blood the Enemy: Inflict a number of hit points of dam- 7 16 16
age on enemy faction assets or bases equal to your 
faction’s total Force, Cunning, and Wealth ratings. 8 20 20
Difficulty 2.

Peaceable Kingdom: Don’t take an Attack action for four 
turns. Difficulty 1.

Destroy the Foe: Destroy a rival faction. Difficulty equal 
to 1 plus the average of the faction’s Force, Cun-
ning, and Wealth ratings.

Inside Enemy Territory: Have a number of stealthed 
assets on worlds with other planetary govern-
ments equal to your Cunning score. Units that 
are already stealthed on worlds when this goal is 
adopted don’t count. Difficulty 2.



218• Cunning Assets

Cunning Assets

Base of Influence: This asset is special, and is required can sacrifice the false front instead to nullify the 
for purchasing or upgrading units on a particular killing blow. 
world. Any damage done to a Base of Influence is Informers: Minions that lace a planet’s underworld, 
also done to a faction’s hit points. The cost of a watchful for intruders. They can choose to Attack 
Base of Influence equals its maximum hit points, a faction without specifying a target asset. On a 
which can be any number up to the total maxi- successful Cunning vs. Cunning attack, all Steal-
mum hit points of its owning faction. A faction’s thed assets on the planet belonging to that faction 
bases of influence don’t count against their maxi- are revealed. Informers can target a faction even if 
mum assets. A Base of Influence can only be pur- none of their assets are visible on a world; at worst, 
chased with the Expand Influence action. they simply learn that there are no stealthed assets.

Blackmail: Selectively degrade the effectiveness of an Lobbyists: Usable to block the governmental permis-
asset. Any attempt to attack or defend against sion that is sometimes required to buy an asset or 
Blackmail loses any bonus dice earned by tags. transport it into a system. When a rival faction 

Boltholes: Equipped with a number of postech inno- gains permission to do so, the Lobbyists can make 
vations to make cleaning them out a costly and an immediate Cunning vs. Cunning test against 
dangerous pursuit. If a faction Special Forces the faction; if successful, the permission is with-
or Military Unit asset on the same planet as the drawn and cannot be re-attempted until next turn. 
Boltholes suffers damage sufficient to destroy it, Organization Moles : These can subvert and confuse 
it is instead set at 0 HP and rendered untouchable enemy assets, striking to damage their cohesion.
and unusable until it is repaired to full strength. Panopticon Matrix: These facilities weave braked-AI 
If the Boltholes are destroyed before this happens, intelligence analysts into a web of observation 
the asset is destroyed with them. capable of detecting the slightest evidence of in-

Book of Secrets: Exhaustively cataloged psychometric truders on a world. Every rival Stealthed asset on 
records on important and influential local figures, the planet must succeed in a Cunning vs. Cunning 
allowing uncanny accuracy in predicting their ac- test at the beginning of every turn or lose their 
tions. Once per turn, a Book of Secrets allows the Stealth. The owner also gains an additional die 
faction to reroll one die for an action taken on on all Cunning attacks and defenses on that planet.
that world or force an enemy faction to reroll one Party Machines: Political blocks control particular cities 
die. This reroll can only be forced once per turn, or regions… blocks that are firmly in control of 
no matter how many Books of Secrets are owned. the faction. Each turn, a Party Machine provides 

Covert Shipping: Quiet interstellar asset transport. Any 1 FacCred to its owning faction.
one Special Forces unit can be moved between any Popular Movements: A planet-wide surge of enthusiasm 
worlds within three hexes of the Covert Shipping for a cause controlled by the faction. This sup-
at the cost of one FacCred. port pervades all levels of government, and the 

Covert Transit Net: Facilities web an area of space with government always grants any asset purchase or 
a network of smugglers and gray-market freighter movement requests made by the faction.
captains. As an action, any Special Forces assets Saboteurs: Minions rained in launching strikes against 
can be moved between any worlds within three enemy operations. An asset attacked by saboteurs 
hexes of the Covert Transit Net. cannot apply any Use Asset Ability action until the 

Cracked Comms: A cryptographic asset for the inter- start of the attacking faction’s next turn. This ap-
ception and deciphering of enemy communica- plies whether or not the attack was successful.
tions. Friendly fire can be induced with the right Seditionists: These asset sap a target’s loyalty and will to 
interference. If the Cracked Comms succeeds in obey. For a cost of 1d4 FacCreds, the Seditionists 
defending against an attack, it can immediately can attach themselves to an enemy asset. Until 
cause the attacking asset to make an attack against they attach to a different asset or no longer share 
itself for normal damage or counterattack results. the same planet, the affected asset cannot attack. 

Cyberninjas: Outfitted with the latest in personal If the asset is destroyed, the Seditionists survive.
stealth cyberware, cyberninjas are designed to Seductresses: They and their male equivalents subvert 
avoid all but the most careful scans. the leadership of enemy assets. As an action, a Se-

Demagogues: Popular leaders of a particular faith or ductress can travel to any world within one hex. 
ideology that can be relied upon to point their As an attack, a Seductress does no damage, but an 
followers in the direction of maximum utility. asset that has been successfully attacked imme-

False Front: This asset allows a faction to preserve more diately reveals any other Stealthed assets of that 
valuable resources. If another asset on the planet faction on the planet. Only Special Forces units 
suffers enough damage to destroy it, the faction can attack a Seductress.



Cunning Assets •219 

Asset HP Cost TL Type Attack Counter Note

Cunning 1

Smugglers 4 2 4 Starship Cunning vs. Wealth, 1d4 damage None A
Informers 3 2 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, special None A, S
False Front 2 1 0 Logistics Facility None None S
Base of Influence * * 0 Special None None S

Cunning 2

Lobbyists 4 4 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, special None S
Saboteurs 6 5 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d4 damage None S
Blackmail 4 4 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, 1d4+1 damage None S
Seductress 4 4 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, special None A, S

Cunning 3

Cyberninjas 4 6 4 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage None -
Stealth - 2 0 Tactic None None S
Covert Shipping 4 8 4 Logistics Facility None None A, S

Cunning 4

Party Machine 10 8 0 Logistics Facility Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage 1d6 damage S
Vanguard Cadres 12 8 3 Military Unit Cunning vs. Cunning, 1d6 damage 1d6 damage -
Tripwire Cells 8 12 4 Special Forces None 1d4 damage A, S
Seditionists 8 12 0 Special Forces None None A

Cunning 5

Organization Moles 8 10 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage None
Cracked Comms 6 14 0 Tactic None Special S
Boltholes 6 12 4 Logistics Facility None 2d6 damage S

Cunning 6

Transport Lockdown 10 20 4 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, special None S
Covert Transit Net 15 18 4 Logistics Facility None None A
Demagogue 10 20 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d8 damage 1d8 damage -

Cunning 7

Popular Movement 16 25 4 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage 1d6 damage S
Book of Secrets 10 20 4 Tactic None 2d8 damage S
Treachery 5 10 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, Special None S

Cunning 8

Panopticon Matrix 20 30 5 Logistics Facility None 1d6 damage. S

A “P” special code indicates a need for planetary governmental permission to raise or transport in the asset. “A” means 
that the asset can perform a special action, and “S” indicates that the asset has a special feature or cost.

Smugglers: Men and women skilled in extracting per- transport assets onto that planet without spending 
sonnel. For one FacCred, the smugglers asset can 1d4 FacCreds and waiting one turn.
transport itself and/or any one Special Forces unit Treachery: Traitors can attack an enemy asset. On a 
to a planet up to two hexes away. successful attack, the Treachery asset is lost, 5 Fac-

Stealth: Not an asset, per se, but a special quality that Creds are gained, and the targeted asset switches 
can be purchased for another Special Forces asset sides to join the traitor’s faction, even if the faction 
on the planet. An asset that has been Stealthed does not otherwise have the attributes necessary.
cannot be detected or attacked by other factions. Tripwire Cells: These observers are alert to the arriv-
If the unit normally requires the permission of a al of stealthed units. Whenever a stealthed asset 
planetary government to be moved onto a planet, lands or is purchased on a planet with tripwire 
that permission may be foregone. An asset loses cells, the Cells make an immediate Cunning vs. 
its Stealth if it is used to attack or defend. Cunning attack against the owning faction. If suc-

Transport Lockdown: These techniques involve selec- cessful, the asset loses its stealth.
tive pressure on local routing and shipping com- Vanguard Cadres: Followers of the movement are in-
panies. On a successful Cunning vs. Cunning at- spired sufficiently to take up arms and fight on 
tack against a rival faction, the rival faction cannot behalf of their leadership.



220• Force Assets

Force Assets

Base of Influence: This asset is special, and is required Gravtank Formations: These tank formations are com-
for purchasing or upgrading units on a particular posed of advanced postech gravtank units that are 
world. Any damage done to a Base of Influence is capable of covering almost any terrain and crack-
also done to a faction’s hit points. The cost of a ing even the toughest defensive positions.
Base of Influence equals its maximum hit points, Guerrilla Populace: Such assets reflect popular support 
which can be any number up to the total maxi- among the locals and a cadre of men and women 
mum hit points of its owning faction. A faction’s willing to fight as partisans.
bases of influence don’t count against their maxi- Hardened Personnel: These are the employees and sup-
mum assets. A Base of Influence can only be pur- port staff of the faction that have been trained in 
chased with the Expand Influence action. defensive fighting and equipped with supply cach-

Beachhead Landers: A collection of short-range, es and hardened fallback positions.
high-capacity spike drive ships capable of moving Heavy Drop Assets: These craft allow for the transport 
large numbers of troops. As an action, the asset of resources from one world to another. As an 
may move any number of assets on the planet, in- action, any one non-Starship asset, including this 
cluding itself, to any world within one hex at a cost one, may be moved to any world within one hex 
of one FacCred per asset moved. for one FacCred.

Blockade Fleets: A ragtag lot of corsairs, pirates, priva- Hitmen: Crudely-equipped thugs and assassins with 
teers, and other deniable assets. When they suc- minimal training that have been aimed at a rival 
cessfully Attack an enemy faction asset, they steal faction’s leadership.
1d4 FacCreds from the target faction as well. This Integral Protocols: A complex web of braked-AI sup-
theft can occur to a faction only once per turn, ported sensors and redundant security checks used 
no matter how many blockade fleets attack. As an to defeat attempts to infiltrate an area. They can 
action, this asset may also move itself to a world defend only against attacks versus Cunning, but 
within one hex. they add an additional die to the defender’s roll.

Capital Fleets: The pride of an empire, this is a collec- Militia Units: Groups of lightly-equipped irregular 
tion of massive capital warships without peer in troops with rudimentary military training but no 
most sectors. Capital fleets are expensive to keep heavy support.
flying, and cost an additional 2 FacCreds of main- Planetary Defenses: Massive mag cannons and gravi-
tenance each turn. As an action, they may move tic braker gun arrays designed to defend against 
to any world within three hexes of their current starship bombardments and repel unauthorized 
location. Planetary government permission is re- landing. Planetary defenses can only defend 
quired to raise a capital fleet, but not to move one against attacks by Starship-type assets.
into a system. Postech Infantry: The backbone of most planetary 

Counterintel Units: These security units specialize in armies, these well-trained soldiers are usually 
code breaking, internal security, and monitoring equipped with mag weaponry and combat field 
duties. They can crack open enemy plots long be- uniforms, and have heavy support units attached.
fore they have time to come to fruition. Pretech Infantry: The cream of the stellar ground 

Cunning Traps: This asset covers all the myriad strata- forces, elite troops kitted out in the best pretech 
gems of war, from induced landslides to spreading weaponry and armor available, with sophisticated 
local diseases. heavy support weaponry integral to the unit.

Deep Strike Landers: These advanced transport ships Pretech Logistics: These assets represent caches, smug-
are capable of moving an asset long distances. As glers, or internal research and salvage programs. 
an action, any one non-Starship asset, including As an action, a pretech logistics asset allows the 
itself, can be moved between any two worlds owner to buy one Force asset on that world that 
within three hexes of the deep strike landers, at a requires up to tech level 5 to purchase. This asset 
cost of 2 FacCreds. This movement can be done costs half again as many FacCreds as usual, round-
even if the local planetary government objects, al- ed up. Only one asset can be purchased per turn.
beit doing so is usually an act of open war. Psychic Assassins: Combat-trained psychics equipped 

Elite Skirmishers: These lightly-equipped troops are with advanced pretech stealth gear and psitech 
trained for guerrilla warfare and quick raids. weaponry. Psychic assassins automatically start 

Extended Theater: These facilities allow for transport- Stealthed when purchased.
ing assets long distances. As an action, any one Security Personnel: Standard civilian guards or police-
non-Starship asset, including itself, can be moved men, usually equipped with nonlethal weaponry 
between any two worlds within two hexes of the or personal sidearms.
extended theater, at a cost of 1 FacCred.



Force Assets •221 

Asset HP Cost TL Type Attack Counter Note

Force 1

Security Personnel 3 2 0 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 1d3+1 damage 1d4 damage -
Hitmen 1 2 0 Special Forces Force vs. Cunning, 1d6 damage None -
Militia Unit 4 4 3 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 1d6 damage 1d4+1 damage P
Base of Influence * * 0 Special None None S

Force 2

Heavy Drop Assets 6 4 4 Facility None None A
Elite Skirmishers 5 5 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 2d4 damage 1d4+1 damage P
Hardened Personnel 4 4 3 Special Forces None 1d4+1 damage -
Guerrilla Populace 6 4 0 Military Unit Force vs. Cunning, 1d4+1 damage None -

Force 3

Zealots 4 6 0 Special Forces Force vs Force, 2d6 damage 2d6 damage S
Cunning Trap 2 5 0 Tactic None 1d6+3 damage -
Counterintel Unit 4 6 4 Special Forces Cunning vs Cunning, 1d4+1 damage 1d6 damage -

Force 4

Beachhead Landers 10 10 4 Facility None None A
Extended Theater 10 10 4 Facility None None A
Strike Fleet 8 12 4 Starship Force vs. Force, 2d6 damage 1d8 damage A
Postech Infantry 12 8 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 1d8 damage 1d8 damage P

Force 5

Blockade Fleet 8 10 4 Starship Force vs. Wealth, 1d6 damage * None S
Pretech Logistics 6 14 0 Facility None None A
Psychic Assassins 4 12 4 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6+2 damage None S

Force 6

Pretech Infantry 16 20 5 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 2d8 damage 2d8+2 damage P
Planetary Defenses 20 18 4 Facility None 2d6+6 damage * S
Gravtank Formation 14 25 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 2d10+4 damage 1d10 damage P

Force 7

Deep Strike Landers 10 25 4 Facility None None A
Integral Protocols 10 20 5 Facility None 2d8+2 damage * S
Space Marines 16 30 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force 2d8+2 damage 2d8 damage A

Force 8

Capital Fleet 30 40 4 Spaceship Force vs. Force, 3d10+4 damage 3d8 damage A, S

A “P” special code indicates a need for planetary governmental permission to raise or transport in the asset. “A” means 
that the asset can perform a special action, and “S” indicates that the asset has a special feature or cost.

Space Marines: Heavily-armored specialist troops 
trained for ship boarding actions and opposed Eliminating Force Assets
landings. As an action, they can move to any world It’s important to remember that a disabled or dam-
within one hex of their current location, whether aged Force asset hasn’t necessarily been blown to 
or not the planetary government permits it. pieces on a battlefield. When thinking of ways that 

Strike Fleets: Forces composed of frigate or cruiser-class a conflict might have harmed such an asset, re-
vessels equipped with space-to-ground weaponry member that demoralization, confusion, subver-
and sophisticated defenses against light planetary sion, and simple lack of upkeep might all cripple 
weaponry. As an action, they can move to any the effectiveness of an asset, or even destroy it as 
world within one hex of their current location. an effective force without rebuilding as expensive 

Zealots: Members of the faction so utterly dedicated as buying a fresh asset. A navy with spacemanship 
that they are willing to launch suicide attacks or skills so neglected as to constantly run ships into 
hold positions to the death. Zealots take 1d4 dam- each other is just as worthless to its owning faction 
age every time they launch a successful attack or as a fleet of smoking wrecks, and the only damage 
perform a counterattack. done there was to the organization’s focus.



222• Wealth Assets

Wealth Assets

Bank Assets: Once per turn, the faction can ignore one Marketers: Deployed to confuse enemy factions into 
cost or FacCred loss imposed by another faction. untimely investments. As an action, the marketers 
This does not require an action. Multiple bank as- may test Cunning vs. Wealth against a rival fac-
sets allow multiple losses to be ignored. tion’s asset. If successful, the target faction must 

Base of Influence: These follow the standard rules for immediately pay half the asset’s purchase cost, 
Bases of Influence. rounded down, or have it become disabled and 

Blockade Runners: These starship captains excel at useless until this price is paid.
transporting goods through unfriendly lines. As Medical Center: Salvage and repair damaged assets. 
an action, a blockade runner can transfer itself or Once between turns, if a Special Forces or Mili-
any one Military Unit or Special Forces to a world tary Unit asset on the world is destroyed, the fac-
within three hexes for a cost of two FacCreds. tion may immediately pay half its purchase cost 
They can even move units that would otherwise to restore it with one hit point. Any Repair Asset 

require planetary government permission to enter. action taken on that world costs one less FacCred 
Commodities Brokers: They substantially lessen the for Special Forces and Military Units.

cost of large-scale investments by timing mate- Mercenaries: Groups of well-equipped, highly-trained 
rials purchases properly. As an action, the owner soldiers willing to serve the highest bidder. Mer-
of a commodities broker can roll 1d8; that many cenaries have a maintenance cost of one FacCred 
FacCreds are subtracted from the cost of their next per turn. As an action, Mercenaries can move to 
asset purchase, down to a minimum of half nor- any world within one hex of their current location. 
mal price, rounded down. To purchase or move a Mercenary asset to a planet 

Franchise: This asset reflects a deniable connection requires government permission.
with a local licensee for the faction’s goods and Monopoly: An open or tacit stranglehold on certain vital 
services. When a Franchise successfully attacks a businesses or resources on a world. As an action, 
enemy asset, the enemy faction loses one FacCred owners of a monopoly may force one other faction 
(if available), which is gained by the Franchise’s with unstealthed assets on that world to pay them 
owner. This loss can happen only once a turn, no one FacCred. If the target faction can’t pay, they 
matter how many Franchises attack. lose one asset of their choice on the world.

Freighter Contract: A special link with heavy shipping Postech Industry: As an action, the owning faction can 
spacers. As an action, the faction may move any roll 1d6 for a Postech Industry asset. On a 1, one 
one non-Force asset, including this one, to any FacCred is lost, on a 2-4 one FacCred is earned, 
world within two hexes at a cost of one FacCred. and a 5-6 returns two FacCreds. If money is lost 

Harvesters: These gather the natural resources of a and no resources are available to pay it, the Pos-
world, whether ore, biologicals, or other unpro- tech Industry is destroyed.
cessed goods. As an action, the Harvesters’ owning Pretech Manufactories: Rare, precious examples of 
faction may roll 1d6. On 3+, gain one FacCred. functioning pretech industrial facilities, retrofit-

Hostile Takeover: This asset can seize control of dam- ted to work without the benefit of specialized psy-
aged and poorly-controlled assets. If a Hostile chic disciplines. As an action, the owning faction 
Takeover does enough damage to destroy an as- can roll 1d8 for a Pretech Manufactory, and gain 
set, the target is instead reduced to 1 hit point and half that many FacCreds, rounded up.
acquired by the Hostile Takeover’s owning faction. Pretech Researchers: A highly versatile team of research 

Laboratory: The lab allows a world to make hesitant and design specialists capable of supporting lim-
progress in tech. The presence of a Laboratory ited pretech… as long as they’re adequately fund-
allows assets to be purchased on that world as if it ed. Any world with Pretech Researchers on it is 
had Tech Level 4. treated as tech level 5 for the purpose of buying 

Lawyers: Sophists in immaculate suits or charismatic Cunning and Wealth assets. Pretech researchers 
tribal skalds, lawyers have the ability to tie an ene- have a maintenance cost of 1 FacCred per turn.
my up in the coils of their own internal rules, dam- R&D Departments: These allow the smooth extension 
aging assets with confusion and red tape. Lawyers of wealth-creation and industrial principles to the 
cannot attack or counterattack Force assets. farthest reaches of the faction’s operations. A fac-

Local Investments: These give the faction substantial in- tion with an R&D department may treat all plan-
fluence over the commerce on a world. Any other ets as having tech level 4 for purposes of buying 
faction that tries to buy an asset on that planet Wealth assets.
must pay one extra FacCred. This money is not Scavenger Fleets: These rag-tag armadas bring enor-
given to the investments’ owner, but is lost. This mous technical and mercantile resources to their 
penalty is only applied once. patrons, along with a facility with heavy guns. As 



Wealth Assets •223 

Asset HP Cost TL Type Attack Counter Note

Wealth 1

Franchise 3 2 2 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d4 damage 1d4-1 damage S
Harvesters 4 2 0 Facility None 1d4 A
Local Investments 2 1 2 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d4-1 damage None S
Base of Influence * * 0 Special None None S

Wealth 2

Freighter Contract 4 5 4 Starship Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d4 damage None A
Lawyers 4 6 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Wealth, 2d4 damage 1d6 damage S
Union Toughs 6 4 0 Military Unit Wealth vs. Force, 1d4+1 damage 1d4 damage
Surveyors 4 4 4 Special Forces None 1d4 damage A, S

Wealth 3

Postech Industry 4 8 4 Facility None 1d4 damage A
Laboratory 4 6 0 Facility None None S
Mercenaries 6 8 4 Military Unit Wealth vs. Force, 2d4+2 damage 1d6 damage A, S, P

Wealth 4

Shipping Combine 10 10 4 Facility None 1d6 damage A
Monopoly 12 8 3 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d6 damage 1d6 damage S
Medical Center 8 12 4 Facility None None S
Bank 8 12 3 Facility None None S

Wealth 5

Marketers 8 10 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Wealth, 1d6 damage None A
Pretech Researchers 6 14 4 Special Forces None None S
Blockade Runners 6 12 4 Starship None 2d4 damage A

Wealth 6

Venture Capital 10 15 4 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d6 1d6 damage A
R&D Department 15 18 4 Facility None None S
Commodities Broker 10 20 0 Special Forces Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d8 damage 1d8 damage A

Wealth 7

Pretech Manufactory 16 25 5 Facility None None S
Hostile Takeover 10 20 4 Tactic Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d10 damage 2d8 damage S
Transit Web 5 15 5 Facility Cunning vs. Cunning, 1d12 damage None S

Wealth 8

Scavenger Fleet 20 30 5 Starship Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d10+4 damage 2d10 damage.

A “P” special code indicates a need for planetary governmental permission to raise or transport in the asset. “A” means 
that the asset can perform a special action, and “S” indicates that the asset has a special feature or cost.

an action, a Scavenger Fleet can be moved to any be moved between any two worlds within three 
world within three hexes. Scavenger Fleets cost 2 hexes of the Transit Web. This may be done freely 
FacCreds a turn in maintenance. on the owner’s turn so long as the fee can be paid, 

Shipping Combine: Transport large amounts of equip- and using the ability doesn’t require an action.
ment and personnel between worlds. As an action, Union Toughs: These bruisers don’t much like scabs and 
the combine may move any number of non-Force management, and they’re willing to take the fac-
assets, including itself, to any world within two tion’s word on which people are which. They’re 
hexes at a cost of one FacCred per asset. lightly armed and poorly trained, but they can in-

Surveyors: Explore potential resource and investment filtrate to perform sabotage.
options on worlds. The presence of a Surveyor Venture Capital: This asset grows resources out of 
crew allows one additional die to be rolled on seemingly nowhere, harvesting the best of entre-
Expand Influence actions. As an action, a surveyor preneurship for the faction’s benefit. As an action, 
crew can be moved to any world within two hexes. venture capital can be tapped. 1d8 is rolled; on a 1, 

Transit Web: These facilities allow almost effortless re- the asset is destroyed, while on a 2-3 one FacCred 
location of all assets. For one FacCred, any num- is gained, 4-7 yields two FacCreds and 8 grants 
ber of non-starship Cunning or Wealth assets may three FacCreds.



224• Faction Tags

Faction Tags

Most factions have some unique quality about them, Exchange Consulate
some trait that distinguishes them from other factions This faction is either led through an Exchange Con-
of similar resources. Whether a particularly fanatical sulate or has close ties with that pacifistic society of 
band of ideological crusaders or an ancient order of bankers and diplomats. The sophisticated economic 
pacifistic scientists, faction tags allow a GM to give a services they provide strengthen the faction.
group a few special tricks of their own. Effect: When the faction successfully completes a 

A faction should generally be given one tag, or two “Peaceable Kingdom” Goal, they may roll 1d6; on 
at the most for particularly versatile organizations. The a 4+, they gain a bonus experience point. Once 
exception is the Planetary Government tag, which can per turn, the faction may roll an extra d10 when 
be acquired– and lost– multiple times to reflect the defending against a Wealth attack.
faction’s seizure of new worlds. Factions tags do not 
normally change without some drastic and organiza- Fanatical
tion-shaping event. The members of this faction just don’t know when to 

quit. No matter how overmatched, the members will 
Colonists keep fighting to the bitter end- and occasionally past it.
This faction is a fresh colony on an otherwise largely Effect: The faction always rerolls any dice that come up 
untouched planet. It is this brave band of pioneers that as 1. This zealousness leaves them open at times, 
will tame the world’s wild forces and bring forth a bet- however; they always lose ties during attacks.
ter life for those who come after.
Effect: This faction has all the benefits of the Planetary Imperialists

Government tag for its homeworld, as no other This faction nurses wild dreams of controlling the sec-
government exists on a fresh colony. The faction’s tor, whether out of an impulse to bring their local cul-
homeworld is also treated as if it had at least tech ture and technology to less fortunate worlds or simple 
level 4. Colonies with fewer than 100,000 citi- lust for dominion. They excel at defeating planetary 
zens lack the necessary industrial infrastructure defenses and standing armies.
to build Spaceship-type assets. Effect: This faction may roll an extra d10 for attacks 

made as part of a Seize Planet action.
Deep Rooted
This faction has been part of a world’s life for time out Machiavellian
of mind. Most natives can hardly imagine the world This faction’s meat and drink is intrigue, its members 
without this faction’s presence, and the traditional pre- delighting in every opportunity to scheme. It may be 
rogatives and dignities of the group are instinctively a secret cabal of hidden masters or the decadent court 
respected. of a fallen stellar empire, but its membership has for-
Effect: This faction can roll one additional d10 when gotten more of treachery than most others ever learn.

defending against attacks on assets on their home- Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an additional 
world. If the faction ever changes homeworlds, d10 when making a Cunning attack.
this tag is lost.

Mercenary Group
Eugenics Cult The faction sells its services to the highest bidder, and 
The forbidden maltech secrets of advanced human ge- is an extremely mobile organization. Vast amounts of 
netic manipulation are known to this faction, and they men and material can be moved interstellar distances 
use them with gusto. Slave-engineered humanoids and in just a few months.

“deathless” leadership are just two of the more common Effect: All faction assets gain the following special abil-
alterations these unstable scientists undertake. ity: As an action, the asset may move itself to any 
Effect: Eugenics Cultists can buy the Gengineered world within one hex.

Slaves asset; it’s an asset requiring Force 1 with 
the statistics of 6 HP, 2 FacCred cost, tech level 4 Perimeter Agency
required, with an Attack of Force vs. Force/1d6 This faction is or is closely tied to an Agency of the 
damage and a Counterattack of 1d4 damage. Once enigmatic Perimeter organization. Originally orga-
per turn, the Eugenics Cult can roll an extra d10 nized by the Terran Mandate to detect and contain 
on an attack or defense by a Gengineered Slaves maltech outbreaks until Mandate fleet resources could 
asset, regardless of the stat being used. Gengi- be dispatched, the Perimeter retains numerous ancient 
neered Slaves can count as either a Military Unit override codes for pretech security protocols.
or Special Forces, determined when the cult first Effect: Once per turn, the faction may roll an addi-
creates a specific asset. tional d10 when making an attack against an asset 



Faction Tags •225 

that requires tech level 5 to purchase. The faction tion can also force a rival faction to reroll any one 
may roll an extra die when making a test to detect d10, whether or not they’re involved in the roll.
Stealthed assets.

Savage
Pirates Whether a proud tribe of neoprimitives struggling 
This faction is a scourge of the spacelanes, driving up against the material limits of their world or a pack of 
the cost of shipping and terrorizing merchant captains degenerate tomb world cannibals, this faction is accus-
without pity. They steal and refit ships with vicious tomed to surviving without the benefits of advanced 
ingenuity, cobbling together space armadas out of the technology and maximizing local resources.
leavings of their prey. Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an extra die 
Effect: Any movement of an asset onto a world that has when defending with an asset that requires tech 

a Base of Influence for this faction costs one extra level 0 to purchase.
FacCred, paid to this faction.

Scavengers
Planetary Government This faction might live within the wreckage of a tomb 
This faction is the legitimate government of a planet. world, salvage the castoffs of some decadent plea-
Rebel groups and rival factions may have assets on the sure-world or ply the ruins of an orbital scrapyard. 
planet, but control over the instruments of the state Whatever their territory, this faction knows how to 
is firmly in this faction’s hands. The faction may rule find worth amid seemingly useless trash.
openly, or it may simply have an inexorable grasp on Effect: Whenever the faction destroys an asset or has 
the existing authorities. one of their assets destroyed, they gain 1 FacCred.
Effect: The faction’s permission is required to buy or 

import those assets marked as needing govern- Secretive
ment permission. This tag can be acquired multi- This faction is marked by elaborate protocols of secre-
ple times, once for each planet the faction controls. cy and misdirection. It may be split up into numerous 

semi-autonomous cells, or consist largely of trained es-
Plutocratic pionage professionals. Finding the assets of such a fac-
This faction prizes wealth, and its membership strives tion can often be more difficult than destroying them.
constantly to expand and maintain personal fortunes. Effect: All assets purchased by this faction automatical-
Perhaps it is a ruling council of oligarchs or a star-span- ly begin Stealthed. See the list of Cunning assets 
ning trade cartel. for details on Stealth.
Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an additional 

d10 when making a Wealth attack. Technical Expertise
The faction is staffed by large numbers of expert en-

Preceptor Archive gineers and scientists. They can turn even the most 
This faction is or has close ties to a Preceptor Archive unpromising labor pool into superb technicians.
a place of learning operated by the learned Preceptors Effect: This faction treats all planets on which they 
of the Great Archive. These Archives are peaceful in- have a Base of Influence as if they were at least 
stitutions dedicated to the spread of practical knowl- tech level 4. They can build Starship-type assets 
edge and useful engineering to the wider cosmos. Their on any world with at least ten thousand occupants.
large numbers of educated personnel make advanced 
equipment more practical for deployment. Theocratic
Effect: Purchasing an asset that requires tech level 4 or The faction is fueled by the fierce certainty that God 

more costs one fewer FacCred than normal. The is with them- and with no one else. The tight and 
Preceptor Archive may also take the special action occasionally irrational obedience that pervades the 

“Teach Planetary Population”, costing 2 FacCreds organization makes it difficult to infiltrate or subvert 
and allowing them to roll 1d12 for one world. On effectively.
a 12, the world’s tech level permanently becomes Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an extra d10 
4 for the purposes and purchases of this faction. when defending against a Cunning attack.

Psychic Academy Warlike
Most significant factions are capable of employing psy- There are factions with a military orientation, and then 
chics, but this faction can actually train their own. They there are factions that just really love killing things. 
excel at precise and focused application of the psionic Whether or not this faction has developed sophisticat-
disciplines, and can get far more out of their available ed military resources and techniques, the membership 
psychic resources than other factions. is zealous in battle and has a positive taste for fighting.
Effect: This faction can provide psionic mentor train- Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an additional 

ing to qualified psychics. Once per turn, this fac- d10 when making a Force attack.



226• Factions In Your Campaign

Factions In Your Campaign

To create a faction, first decide on the scale of the orga- who organizes a colonial expedition to an uninhabited 
nization. Many factions are restricted to a single world, world will end up with a faction very different from 
and even the most impressive sector empire rarely that of a PC that starts her own psychic academy. In 
exerts direct control over more than a dozen worlds. general, PCs have to actively work to create their fac-
Place the faction’s homeworld and locate any Bases of tion. It does not simply arrive as their natural birthright.
Influence it might have on other worlds. A few words 
beside each Base describing the form it takes can be Adventures and Factions
handy in later planning out adventures with the faction. The actions of adventurers fall outside the faction turn, 

Next, prioritize the faction’s attributes, deciding but the consequences of their escapades can translate 
the order in which they focus on Force, Cunning, and into the loss or acquisition of FacCreds, assets, or fac-
Wealth. Minor factions should have a 4 in their most tion hit points. If the players come up with a scheme to 
important attribute, established planetary govern- strike at the leadership of the Brotherhood of the New 
ments should have a 6, and regional hegemons should Man, success or failure isn’t determined according to 
have an 8. Their second-most important attribute is Force attacks or Cunning defenses. Success is deter-
one less than their primary, and their tertiary attribute mined by the outcome of the adventure itself, and the 
is three less. You can calculate the faction’s hit points group’s ability to overcome the security and obfusca-
from that, but normally minor powers will have 15 HP, tion that surrounds these mad gengineers.
major powers will have 29 HP, and sector hegemons The amount of damage done or benefit given to a 
will have 49 HP. Their off-world Bases of Influence faction by a group’s adventures should be substantial, at 
normally have a maximum HP equal to half that. least as much as could be accomplished with a faction 

Give minor powers one asset in their primary at- turn. It may not be possible to bring down an interstel-
tribute and one asset in a different attribute. Give major lar empire by precision strikes and subversion, but the 
powers two assets in their primary attribute, and two players should be able to see concrete effects from their 
assets in different attributes, and give regional hege- successes. At the very least, the newslines at the end of 
mons four assets in their primary and four in others. each faction turn should include public commentary on 
Place these assets on the worlds occupied by the faction. the visible consequences of their actions.

Select an appropriate faction tag for the organiza- Some players will want to take advantage of the 
tion, one fitting their special focus and origins. If the resources of their factions in the course of their ad-
faction has direct governmental control over one or ventures, either bringing along troops or specialists, or 
more worlds, add Planetary Government tags to them. utilizing faction assets on a personal level. This should 

Finally, select a Goal for the faction. For your ini- be permitted as a general matter; there’s not much fun 
tial three or four sector factions, try to pick goals that in being a colonial governor if you can’t even get a 
will put them in conflict with each other. If the factions corporal’s guard of bodyguards to look after you. Fac-
you make are content to hide from the world and get tion equipment should also be available in reasonable 
along in peace and quiet, they’re unlikely to be terribly amounts. Subordinates are not adventurers, however, 
useful as patrons or enemies for the PC group, unless and while they will perform their duties diligently and 
you intend to enlist the PCs as defenders of some be- well, they won’t willingly take the kind of risks that 
leaguered group of innocents. adventurers often relish. Faction assets should be an 

advantage and a tool for the PCs rather than a crutch.
Creating PC Factions It may come up that a character wants to with-
Eventually, it’s likely that a PC is going to accumulate draw credits from his faction, or donate loot won in the 
the necessary power and influence to start their own course of their adventuring. FacCreds translate poorly 
faction. Often around 9th level, a PC has gained enough into normal credits, as they often represent resources 
renown and competence that others will want to serve that don’t liquidate easily into cash. The GM should feel 
them, and they can choose to parlay that into a faction free to prohibit directly withdrawing cash from a fac-
of their own. This may happen at earlier levels, depend- tion if a PC comes to rely on it too heavily. Otherwise, 
ing on whether or not the PC has made it a significant one FacCred will usually translate into about 100,000 
priority to develop their own faction. credits worth of cash, with substantially larger returns 

Newly-founded factions are fragile, vulnerable if used to make investments, or build things.
things. They start with a score of 2 in their primary Characters can give up to 1d4 x 100,000 credits 
attribute and 1 in the others, 8 hit points, and one asset to a faction in any one turn, with each 100,000 credits 
in their primary attribute. The GM may select one fac- becoming 1 FacCred. Any more than this in one turn is 
tion tag appropriate to the new organization’s nature. wasted due to accounting inefficiency, and the faction 

The exact details of a PC’s new faction will de- will need to spend a full turn processing the donation 
pend largely on what the character did to form it. A PC before it becomes FacCreds.



Example Factions •227 

Example Factions

A GM doesn’t always have time to sort out the details Regional Hegemon
of every faction that might be needed. A group might This world is the mightiest military power in the sector 
decide to attack the planetary government of a world and leads a half-dozen neighboring worlds in a “volun-
that wasn’t important or interesting enough to merit tary confederation” that it ever seeks to expand.
the effort to define its governmental faction during Attributes: Force 8, Cunning 5, Wealth 7
sector creation, for example. The following sample Hit Points: 49
factions can be pulled and used for such places as nec- Assets: Space Marines/Force 7, Planetary Defenses/
essary. Where appropriate, you can add the Planetary Force 6, Blockade Fleet/Force 5, Extended The-
Government tag for legitimate world governments. ater/Force 4, Pretech Manufactory/Wealth 7, 

Shipping Combine/Wealth 4, Tripwire Cells/
Colony World Cunning 4, Cyberninjas/Cunning 3
Thinly-populated worlds with limited infrastructure Tags: Imperialists
tend to have weak colonial governments concerned 
chiefly with issues of basic survival rather than expan- Mercantile Combine
sion or intrigue. A star-spanning consortium of merchants might oper-
Attributes: Force 4, Cunning 3, Wealth 1 ate out of one particular world, but their final loyalty 
Hit Points: 15 is always to their credit balance.
Assets: Guerrilla Populace/Force 2 and Saboteurs/Cun- Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 5, Wealth 6

ning 2 Hit Points: 29
Tags: Colonists Assets: Venture Capital/Wealth 6, Shipping Combine/

Wealth 4, Hardened Personnel/Forces 2, Black-
Lost World mail/Cunning 2
Primitive and barbaric by the standards of the space go- Tags: Plutocratic
ing worlds, a lost world lacks the technical resources of 
their neighbors, but may well have substantial advan- Eugenics Cult
tages in population and cultural cohesion depending on Some people are born to rule- literally. These eugenics 
the world’s habitability. cults believe that superior breeds of humanity can be 
Attributes: Force 4, Cunning 1, Wealth 3 successfully engineered, and that good genetic back-
Hit Points: 15 ground legitimizes rule over less “advanced” humans. 
Assets: Zealots/Force 3, Harvesters/Wealth 1 Such cults are widely loathed, but the experimental 
Tags: Savage medical treatment they offer to those who can find 

them makes unwilling converts of some.
Backwater Planet Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 6, Wealth 5
Perhaps this world was important once, but disaster, Hit Points: 29
ennui, or the Scream has left it a sleepy planet disinter- Assets: Boltholes/Cunning 5, Demagogue/Cunning 6, 
ested in the wider galaxy. Most worlds with ordinary Laboratory/Wealth 3, Gengineered Slaves/Force 
levels of technology in a sector will fit this template. 1
Attributes: Force 6, Cunning 3, Wealth 5 Tags: Eugenics Cult
Hit Points: 29
Assets: Postech Infantry/Force 4, Planetary Defenses/ Rebel Freedom Fighters

Force 6, Informers/Cunning 1, Bank/Wealth 4 Even in the most tyrannical corners of the galaxy, the 
Tags: Deep Rooted human heart yearns for freedom. These factions spring 

up in the shadow of oppressive governments. For each 
Zealous Faith one that is crushed, a new one rises in time.
This religious organization is a powerful force in the Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 4, Wealth 1
sector, likely with major congregations on several Hit Points: 15
worlds. Assets: Seditionists/Cunning 4, Zealots/Force 3
Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 6, Wealth 5 Tags: Secretive
Hit Points: 29
Assets: Demagogue/Cunning 6, Organization Moles/

Cunning 5, Zealots/Force 3, Marketers/Wealth 5
Tags: Theocratic



228• Example of Faction Play

An Example of Faction Play

The GM has just finished brewing up her initial sector. 4, a Wealth of 3, and a Force of 1. Its maximum hit 
She has a rough sketch of the worlds, she’s fleshed out points are 15. It gets only two assets as a minor power, 
the planet where the initial play session will occur, and so goes with Cyberninjas and Covert Shipping to get 
she’s ready to run the game. She thinks it’d be nice to those ninjas where they need to go. The GM mulls over 
have some background activity going on, so she plans the faction tags, but none seem to be quite right. She 
to create three factions to decorate her world. decides to give it her own tag of “Pretech Stores”, let-

She picks out three groups that are likely to be ting it treat Singularity as a tech level 5 world for pur-
significant players in this corner of her sector: the harsh poses of buying high-tech assets there. While there’s no 
planetary government of Typhon, the initial starting other meaningful authority on the gas giant moon, the 
point for the game, the Rathskeller Combine, a mul- GM doesn’t think it’s proper to give them the Planetary 
tistellar megacorp based off the world of Danube in Government tag because there really isn’t anything else 
the neighboring solar system, and the Way of Voth, a on Singularity except the Vothite base. They don’t have 
pretech-worshiping cult with a hidden base on Singu- the implicit military power to prevent hostile military 
larity, a gas giant moon in a system neighboring both. assets from landing on the world, so they don’t really 

These aren’t the only possible factions in the sys- fit the mold of the Planetary Government tag.
tem, of course, but they’re the ones most likely to be The last step in creating the factions is to give each 
pertinent to PC interests. If the PCs move on, she might of them an initial goal. She decides that the Rathskeller 
retire some of these factions to bring in new ones. She Combine is really interested in breaking into Typhon’s 
knows she shouldn’t have more than a half-dozen fac- closed market. She gives it the Expand Influence goal, 
tions active at once unless she’s ready to do a lot of which rewards it when it can found a Base of Influence 
tracking during each faction turn. on another planet. Typhon is a violent, expansionistic 

She knows the Typhon government is a fairly power that goes in for Blood the Enemy, so it seeks to 
powerful faction, having effective control of its home inflict hit point damage on rival assets equal to the sum 
planet save for some plucky rebels against its autocratic of its attributes, or 14 points. The Vothites know they 
monarchy. Force is its strongest tool, so she gives it a can’t survive a direct confrontation with either import-
rating of 6 in that, followed by Wealth of 5 and Cun- ant power, so they want to get ready to make a move 
ning of 3. Its maximum hit points are 29. As a major when they’re stronger; they choose Peaceable Kingdom, 
power, it has two Force assets and two more assets of needing to spend four consecutive turns without taking 
any kind. Typhon would love to have Pretech Infantry an Attack action.
and has the Force score to support it, but its tech level With this established, the GM is ready to run the 
is 4, too low for such advanced troops. It settles for a first faction turn.
Strike Fleet and some Postech Infantry. Aside from that, 
it has a government Monopoly on spike drive com- Turn One
ponents and a Postech Industry that helps make them. The GM randomly selects the Rathskeller Combine to 
It also has a Base of Influence on its home world of go first, followed by Typhon, and then the Vothites.
Typhon that automatically has 29 hit points, the same First, the Combine earns its income for the turn; 
as the faction itself. Finally, it has the faction tag of half its Wealth plus a quarter of its total Force and Cun-
Planetary Government, because it’s the legitimate ruler ning, rounded down. That means 5 FacCreds.
of Typhon. Next, it pays maintenance. It has no assets that 

For the Rathskeller Combine, the GM decides that require maintenance and hasn’t got more assets of any 
it’s about as powerful as the Typhon government due one type than its corresponding attribute, so it has no 
to its far-flung mercantile connections. On reflection, maintenance cost. If it were to accumulate four Cun-
she thinks its main money comes from its control of ning assets, however, while only having a Cunning of 
the ship-building industry outside the Typhon system, 3, it would have to pay one FacCred for each over the 
which makes it an economic competitor with the state- limit. Bases of Influence don’t count for this purpose.
run Typhon shipyards. She gives it a Wealth rating of Now the Combine has to decide what action to 
6, Force of 5, and Cunning of 3, with a maximum HP take. It knows that Typhon is itching for a fight. The 
of 29. Since it’s starship-centric, she gives it Shipping Combine is nervous about their rival’s Strike Fleet, 
Combine and Blockade Runner assets for Wealth, and but that seems to be the only force that immediately 
other assets of Elite Skirmishers and Saboteurs. The threatens them. The Postech Infantry that Typhon has 
Plutocratic tag fits its mercantile origins. doesn’t have any practical way to cross into Danubian 

For the final faction, the GM decides to make space unless Typhon buys some sort of transport asset. 
them a relatively weak group, one that tries to use its Right now there seems no way for the Typhonians 
limited supplies of pretech artifacts to manipulate “less to do that, so the Combine decides to go for a long 
developed” societies. She gives it a Cunning score of economic game, taking the Buy Asset action to spend 2 



Example of Faction Play •229 

FacCreds on Harvesters. The GM decides that this rep- Blockade Runners, for 2d4 damage, for 7 points. The 
resents a new flotilla of asteroid mining tugs. A faction Strike Fleet is now down to 1 hit point.
can buy only one asset per turn and can take only one The Rathskeller Combine now senses an opportu-
action, so the Combine’s turn is over. nity. They collect their income of 5 FacCreds for a total 

Typhon isn’t wasting any time. It gets its FacCred of 8 and take an Attack action of their own, ordering 
income for the turn of 4 FacCreds and uses its action to the Saboteurs to press the attack. The Strike Fleet is the 
Use Asset Ability to let its Strike Fleet enter the Danube only viable target in the sector, so Typhon is forced to 
system. Some assets require governmental permission defend with it. The Saboteurs’ attack is Cunning versus 
to move them into a system with an existing govern- Cunning. The Combine rolls an 8, a tepid result, while 
ment, but not Strike Fleets. They tend to make their the Strike Fleet gets lucky and rolls a 9. The Saboteurs 
own permission. Typhon would like to start attacking are forced to take the Strike Fleet’s counterattack dam-
Combine assets, but it can only take one action per turn, age of 1d8, and roll a 6; they are wiped out. Stung, the 
so it will have to wait until the next one to open fire. Combine throws the Elite Skirmishers into the fray, 

The Vothites are keeping their head down, accru- the only other asset they have that even has an attack. 
ing their 2 FacCreds. As poor as they are, they need They roll a Force vs. Force attack, Typhon rolls badly, 
to do something about it, so they invest in a Buy As- and the Strike Fleet is destroyed.
set action to get a Harvester. The GM decides that it The GM then writes up the news blasts for the 
represents scavenger teams dispatched to loot vital session, describing how “pirate” boarding parties de-
resources from the dangerous pretech caches hidden stroyed the Typhonian strike fleet by taking advantage 
on Singularity. of security breaches caused by recently-discovered sab-

As the final step, the GM translates these faction oteurs. She decides that both Danube and Typhon want 
actions into newsfeed stories to share with the PCs. to avoid outright war, and that Danube’s planetary gov-
She scribbles up short news blasts about “Typhon First ernment won’t get involved so long as Typhon is only 
Fleet Dispatched to Suppress Piracy in the Danube Sys- cutting down Combine holdings.
tem”, “Rathskeller Combine Commissions New Wing 
of Asteroid Miners”, and “Unusual Ship Traffic In Sin- Turn Three
gularity System”. These stories may not have the whole As it turns out, the PCs took notice of that news item 
truth about affairs, but they’re what the PCs would find about Singularity’s ship activity and decided to inves-
out from the local news organizations. tigate. In the course of their adventure they killed a 

Vothite salvage crew and snatched away a precious haul 
Turn Two of pretech artifacts that the crew had been recovering. 
The PCs completed their first adventure and are busy The GM decides that this costs the Vothites one of their 
swanning around in the Danube system. Nothing two Harvester assets. There is no die roll or faction ac-
they’ve done directly impinges on the local factions, tion related to this; the PCs did it, so it simply happens. 
so the GM simply runs the next faction turn after the They also left plenty of evidence, so the GM makes a 
session is over. Random rolls give Voth the first action, note to have a Vothite cyberninja come after them and 
then Typhon, and then the Combine. their stolen artifacts. Such small-scale actions related to 

Voth gets another 2 FacCreds and dutifully uses PC adventures don’t require a full faction action, so the 
Buy Asset to get another Harvester, scaling up their sal- Vothites don’t need to use an Attack action to go after 
vage efforts. This makes two Wealth assets that Voth the troublesome PCs.
has; it can get one more Wealth asset before it starts to The Vothites go first this round and are not 
have to pay maintenance on any additional ones. They amused. They collect their 2 FacCreds and Use An 
would’ve liked to have used Use An Asset to see if their Ability to see if their remaining Harvester makes them 
existing Harvester made them any money, but they any money; they roll a 4 on its ability and gain an extra 
can’t take two different actions during the same turn, FacCred, for a total of 3 in its coffers this turn.
so they must wait for now. Typhon goes next, collecting 4 FacCreds for a total 

Typhon now collects its 4 FacCreds, for a total of of 12. It’s licking its wounds, but at least it managed to 
8, and uses the Attack action. If it had multiple assets in inflict 6 of the necessary 14 points of damage on a foe 
position, it could attack with all of them; as it stands, to succeed at its Blood the Enemy goal. It uses Buy Asset 

only the Strike Fleet is in the same location as a rival to buy a new Strike Fleet, reconstituting it from the 
power. It aims at the Base of Influence, but the Com- survivors and spending all 12 FacCreds on it.
bine gets to decide which asset the Strike Fleet engages. The Combine goes last, and is at a crossroads. Their 
It chooses to defend with its Blockade Runners. The income this turn gives them 13 FacCreds and they’ve 
Strike Fleet’s Attack is Force versus Force, so Typhon successfully destroyed a Typhionian Strike Fleet, but 
rolls 1d10 and adds its Force rating for a score of 11. it cost them their Saboteurs, and they have only one 
Against this, the Combine rolls 1d10 and adds its own asset left that can even attack at all. What should they 
Force rating for a score of 12. The Strike Fleet’s attack do to address the Typhonian menace? Maybe some PC 
has failed, and it takes the Counterattack damage of the mercenaries might tip the scales for them…






GAME MASTER RESOURCES
The following pages include a number of tables for the The same general attitude is necessary towards 
quick generation of NPCs, patrons, names, place names, other elements of your campaign, not just the house 
and quick encounters. The tables are in no way intend- rules. You need to think about how your specific play-
ed to be exhaustive or particularly detailed. They are ers are likely to react to plot hooks, campaign elements, 
simply quick conveniences for the GM to spare con- and new additions to the game. If you know Eunice 
stant reference to the internet or other books to nail was bored out of her mind by an adventure session 
down the basic flavoring of their NPCs. that revolved around trading, it’s probably a bad idea 

Aside from these tables, this section also discusses to offer her hooks that focus on commercial dealings, 
some of the more common issues that arise for GMs or at least talk it over with her outside the game before 
of Stars Without Number. PC death, the role of combat, you introduce it to make sure there’s something about 
when to use skill checks, how to handle investigations, the hook that she can find engaging.
and other potentially sticky elements are reviewed and As the GM, you already have a lot of responsibility 
advice given for the practical handling of these matters. on your shoulders. You have the adventures to create, 

In addition, this chapter gives some guidelines on the sandbox to populate, and the game itself to run. It 
converting material from the first edition of the game is very unlikely that you have the energy or the time 
to the current revised rules. A selection of potential to worry about creating universally-functional house 
house rules are also suggested for groups that wish to rules and generalized systems. That is the game design-
customize their game a little more. er’s job. It’s up to me to give you general rules that will 

When applying any of these guidelines or sugges- work well in most situations and provide serviceable 
tions, however, it is important that you remember a results with the Typical Gamer. That kind of aver-
critical thing about running the game at your table. aged-out design is necessary if you’re to be provided 

with a basic toolbox of useful mechanics and systems.
Your Game and Your Group But you can do better, because you know your 
The most important thing you can remember as a GM audience. You know what they want, what they’re 
running Stars Without Number is that you are running interested in, and how they’re likely to use the tools 
it for a specific group of people. You are not running it you hand them. You can create specific house rules and 
for a generic Typical Gamer, you are running it for Bob case-by-case permissions that mold your game to fit the 
and Eunice and Feng and Tyler. There is no genericized needs and interests of your own table.
advice that can be applied to your specific group that is Stars Without Number is designed in the spirit of 
nearly as helpful as your own powers of social expertise old-school gaming, where these sort of house rules and 
and your personal knowledge of the table. campaign-specific systems are totally acceptable and 

Game designers sometimes fall into the trap of perfectly normal. This game is not a delicate flower 
trying to force social outcomes at the table through that will wilt if you touch it the wrong way. It is built 
specific game rules. These rules can encourage certain on a basic mechanical chassis more than forty years old, 
outcomes in the general case, but they cannot compel a veritable AK-47 of game design, and it can take an 
results. They are certainly not nearly as effective in pro- incredible amount of punishment and careless handling 
ducing an outcome as you, the GM, can be, because without breaking. You will not ruin your game by add-
these rules can’t know your players as well as you do. ing in house rules that make sense to you.

Whenever you consider making a house rule, or This game belongs to you and your players. As 
adding a tweak to the game, or even basic consider- the designer, I only get a vote in how things should be; 
ations of what kind of sandbox excitement you should the ultimate decision is always with you and your play 
be offering to your players, you must always think group. Only you properly understand the goals of your 
about the specific players you have. Don’t worry about group and the kind of fun you want to have, and only 
the Typical Gamer. The Typical Gamer is not at your you and your players can provide the definitive under-
table. If Bob really wants a new focus that allows his PC standing of your ultimate aim. I am providing you with 
to do a particular trick, you do not need to think of all a basic structure that will work for most groups, but it’s 
the ways a Typical Gamer could abuse or misuse that up to you to add the chrome or tweaks that you want.
new power. You need to think of the ways Bob could Perhaps you won’t need to add any. It may well be 
misuse it. Maybe he is the kind of gamer who would be that the rules exactly as written serve your purpose just 
very disruptive to the game with the ability, and maybe fine, and you have no particular desire to tweak them. 
you know how he plays well enough to tell that he’d If that’s the case, then that’s fine. But you should never 
never cause a problem with it. The same ability that be afraid to reach in and adjust things to improve your 
would be absolutely terrible in the hands of some play- own play. Add systems from other old-school-inspired 
ers can be perfectly safe in the hands of others. Only games, brew up your own rules, or excise bits that don’t 
you can reasonably tell which is which. fit. This game is yours, and you should play it your way.



232• Complications

Common Game Master Complications

Once you’ve successfully created your sector and gath- and let them soak up a portion of the danger. All of 
ered the players, you might find a few difficulties crop- these tactics can be used to tacitly lessen the danger of 
ping up in the course of play. There are certain pitfalls character death without taking it off the table.
and complications that are particular to the style of play Sooner or later, however, it’s likely that some PC is 
that Stars Without Number encourages, and it’s helpful going to kick the bucket. At that point, it becomes nec-
to have an idea beforehand of how to deal with them. essary to get a replacement into the action. The replace-

ment PC should be added as quickly as possible, and it 
Death can often be advantageous for players to roll up these 
Characters in Stars Without Number die easily. The replacements before the game even starts, so they have 
average third-level psychic might well be taken out a character in hand should their former PC catch a bad 
by a lucky pistol round, and even high-level warriors case of laser poisoning. Creating the characters before-
don’t have more than 60 or 70 hit points. It’s true that hand also allows the group to set up ties of association 
biopsionics and lazarus patches can revive characters that help justify why they’re suddenly willing to include 
that get medical help in time, but there are plenty of the new PC in their adventures. These replacements 
situations where there’s just not time to save a team- can be members of the crew of the ship they’re trav-
mate or the attempt proves a failure. If the rules are elling on, outworlders slouching around the local bars, 
used as written, PCs who regularly put themselves in wanderers gone native among the locals, or prisoners 
dangerous situations are going to die. of whatever nefarious group the party is fighting. The 

You and your players should decide at the start of key factor is to get the replacement into action quickly, 
the game how you want to deal with this. For maxi- so the player who’s lost his or her PC isn’t punished 
mum old-school authenticity, you might mutually de- with inactivity at the table as well as PC loss.
cide to just let the dice fall where they may. If Captain It’s generally easiest to have the replacement PC 
Spaulding plunges into the sulfur volcanoes of Badghati be the same level as the dead PC. For high-level adven-
IV, the high-level veteran of dozens of daring inter- tures, it’s distressingly likely that a low-level PC would 
stellar escapades gets a touching space memorial and die quickly when facing challenges of that caliber. If 
his player rolls up a replacement. This is the default they do come in at a lower level, you’re going to have 
assumption of the game, and it can add a great deal of to make some allowances when it comes time for them 
excitement and reward to the sensation of navigating to gain experience points. If everyone is gaining points 
a character through lethal challenges. at the same rate, the lower-level PC will never catch 

It can also really aggravate players who enjoy up; you may want to give them a bonus after each ad-
building deeply-involved PCs with many close ties to venture to ensure that eventually they match the same 
the game world and its characters. A GM can decide to level of competence as the rest of the crew.
omit the risk of death in most cases, reducing PCs with 
0 hit points to “gravely wounded” status and allowing Skill Checks
them to be revived with medical attention. Some sit- Skill checks are susceptible to overuse. Some GMs end 
uations might run the risk of real death, but the GM up forcing a skill check on everything more compli-
can save this for occasions of genuine dramatic impor- cated than tying your bootlaces, or prohibit PCs from 
tance. There’s nothing at all wrong with this approach even hoping to accomplish a feat for which they lack 
to death, and it can help some players focus on the story the appropriate skill. Skill checks are not meant to be 
that they and their group are creating rather than living the sole way that a PC gets something accomplished 
in fear of every goon with a combat rifle. in the world.

Of course, there are shades of gray between these You should be charitable about the things a charac-
two extremes, and most GMs come to inhabit some ter can accomplish without a skill check. If an Expert’s 
point on this spectrum. There are many ways the GM concept is that of a crack spaceship pilot with a Dex-
can lessen the risk of death without out-and-out de- terity modifier of +2 and Pilot-2 skill, you shouldn’t be 
nying it. In particular, the GM can cause enemies to expecting him to make skill checks to operate the ship 
spread their attacks over a group rather than focusing under normal conditions. He can take off, he can land, 
on the weakest PC. Hostiles can pay more attention to he can get to places in the system without bothering 
the warriors in the group rather than the experts or with skill checks. Even someone with Pilot-0 should 
psychics, especially when the Warrior has yet to use his likely be able to do as much, except the expert pilot 
class ability to negate a hit. You can take care not to in- can do it without a check even amid high winds and 
clude instant-death traps or devices in your adventures, low visibility. Let the PCs be good at their chosen focus.
or fabricate situations where a character’s life hinges on Don’t spam skill checks. If a character is trying 
a single die roll. You can include substantial numbers to repair a fusion power plant while under fire from 
of NPC henchmen and companions in an adventure, badlands raiders, don’t turn it into a roll-each-turn ex-



Complications •233 

travaganza to determine how far he progresses in his Enemies should also be played as their morale in-
attempt. Let him roll once, with a failure meaning ei- dicates. A pack of street thugs will not transform into 
ther that he can’t do it in the available time or that he’ll Spartans at Thermopylae, dying to the last man to 
need another 1d6 rounds before he can bring the de- prevent the PCs from discovering their gang hideout. 
fense laser power plant online. Give him player choices Even trained and disciplined combatants are going to 
each turn, like deciding whether to bring a laser online have serious thoughts about retreat as soon as their 
early and risk a short in the wiring. Let a single skill comrades start dying. Only when enemies feel trapped 
check indicate the general course of success or failure, or are defending something as precious to them as their 
but then let the PC make additional choices rather than lives will they normally fight to the last.
additional rolls. Rolls can only add so much tension, 
and tension alone does not guarantee engagement with Negotiation and Diplomacy
a situation. There is a Talk skill, and the fact that this and similar 

Don’t require a skill check unless failing it means social skills exist sometimes causes players or GMs to 
something. If a character can simply keep trying at simply shut off more informal evaluations of social 
something with no real negative consequences, it’s situations. When the PC wants to convince an NPC 
not worth a skill check. They’ll get it sooner or later, of something, they roll Cha/Talk and let the dice tell 
so it’s easiest to just tell them that it was successful. If them how far the NPC is willing to buy their premise. 
time is important and there’s a significant difference The actual words and arguments they use are simply 
between accomplishing it instantly or accomplishing it decorations to the event.
soon, just follow a failed skill check with a roll of 1d6 On one level, this is justifiable. The player of the 
and assume that many rounds, minutes, or hours go by Warrior isn’t expected to be a real-life shootist to roll 
before the PC finally gets it right. a good attack roll, so why should the player of the sil-

Don’t ignore actions taken outside of skill checks. ver-tongued Expert con man have to come up with 
If a character jams a titanium wrecking bar into the a smooth line of patter to use his own abilities? It’s 
cogs of an alien death trap, you probably shouldn’t re- legitimate and reasonable to let the dice determine the 
quire him to make a successful Fix roll to disable the de- success of a conversational gambit. If a player has spent 
vice. What he’s done will objectively work, and there’s character resources on something like social skills, they 
no point or need in rolling for it. If there’s a casket should see a mechanical benefit from it. Moreover, re-
of luminous Mettauan glass underneath the senator’s lying on a player’s conversational talents to move ne-
bed, then the players will find it if they look under the gotiations can often boil down to a game of finding the 
bed, and no Notice check is needed to see if they notice right conversational gambit for the GM rather than 
it. Skill checks are best used to reflect the results of a rationally persuading the NPC.
complicated or uncertain attempt at an action. If the Still, some players and GMs prefer to let actual 
PC tries something that anyone can do and that would argumentation play a bigger role. One potential way to 
have an obvious result, then just let the result happen. do this is to let the player state his or her case, and then 
Don’t use a skill check unless the outcome is unclear. set the Talk check difficulty accordingly. Convincing a 

crime boss to give a PC access to his network of corrupt 
Combat city officials might be a difficulty 8 test if the player 
Combat in Stars Without Number tends to be fairly le- makes a good argument for it, while a desultory request 
thal. One good roll by a pistol-wielding thug can take might be difficulty 10. Alternately, you might implicitly 
out almost any first level character, and characters nev- adjust the consequences of success or failure based on 
er really scale to the point where they can afford to hold the character’s total Charisma and skill bonus. A char-
enemies in contempt. You should take care to structure acter with a +5 total might not succeed in persuading 
your adventures and situations so that PCs are very the crime boss if they roll very low, but he’ll point them 
rarely forced into fights. The shotguns and laser rifles towards someone who might be able to help them. The 
should come out either because the PCs have chosen key for this sort of approach is to let both skills and 
to use them or because they’re facing the consequences player argumentation have a visible effect on the out-
of their own missteps. come, so that players feel that both matter.

Because combat is so dangerous, it’s vital to al- In either case, you should make clear to the group 
low the PCs to set it up on their own terms, assuming which model will be used when they’re making up their 
they’re cunning and prudent enough to take advantage characters. It prevents difficulty later when the player 
of their opportunities. Ambushes, AC bonuses for cov- running the character with a -1 Charisma modifier and 
er, and the use of the environment to hurt and baffle no social skills expects his own glib tongue to carry the 
their foes should all be encouraged. If a character wants day with NPCs.
to use an element of the environment to do something 
interesting, let them. “You do that, and nothing hap-
pens.” is rarely a good answer for any halfway plausible 
PC action.



234• Complications

Searching and Investigation Salvage
Many adventures rely on the party solving a mystery The far future is full of expensive decor. Truly enter-
or unearthing the dark truths behind some enigmat- prising PCs sometimes are of a mind to “salvage” a place 
ic event. PCs can occasionally get frustrated by these down to its foundations, ripping out everything that 
adventures when they feel that they’ve hit a dead end can be resold and trucking it all off to be converted into 
or are presented with a set of clues that they, the play- credits. To some extent, this is simply common sense; 
ers, can’t hope to puzzle out. Conversely, players can no red-blooded freebooter would simply leave un-
sometimes grow bored when the adventures become claimed valuables lying around when he knows they’ll 
a sequence of skill tests, with the PCs simply trying to fetch a good price at the starport. Still, it can be tedious 
roll high so that the GM will let them advance. to handle the logistics of salvage and unbalancing to the 

Running a good investigation-based adventure game to allow PCs to cash in on every alien fork and 
can be difficult, but there are a few tactics that can be wall panel they can drag back to civilization.
useful to a GM. First, identify those pieces of informa- The easiest way to deal with this is to simply make 
tion that must be found in order to solve the puzzle. clear that most non-portable valuables the PCs might 
Cracking the secret organlegging ring run out of the salvage are just too difficult to move on the secondary 
city’s child protective services department might hinge market. Questions of legal ownership, finding a suit-
on identifying the secret lab in which the organs are ably indiscriminate buyer, and avoiding tax scrutiny all 
harvested, the corrupt CPS chief who hides the goods combine to make such efforts more trouble than they’re 
in her home, and the crooked physician who launders worth. It can be interesting to make an adventure out of 
the organs into the donor system. These three facts moving some particularly exceptional piece of salvage, 
have to be discovered in order for the PCs to progress. but as a general rule, it’s just not worth it to strip the 

Once you’ve established the facts, watch for op- copper wiring out of a crime boss’ hideout.
portunities to let them be discovered. Drawn in by the There is also the issue of PCs methodically strip-
hook of a recurring urchin NPC they knew who van- ping the armor, weapons, and pocket change from their 
ished after being picked up by protective services, the dead foes. In most cases this is self-limiting, as most 
PCs might check out the NPC’s old haunts or associates, PCs can’t easily pack around a half-dozen combat rifles 
only to learn that a number of street kids have gone while engaged in the kind of pursuits that leave them 
missing after CPS collected them, and that all of them fighting their former owners. In the unlikely case that 
were picked up by a particular agent. Don’t make the the PCs come back with a cargo sled, most of the ar-
discovery of vital information hinge on a die roll. If mor is probably worthless due to the perforations that 
the PCs take rational investigative steps, they should killed its wearer and the weaponry is unlikely to be so 
be given something to show for it, even if it’s just the valuable as to unbalance the game. Even in that case, 
confidence that their current route is a dead end. You moving the weapons on the black market is usually not 
should be trying to give out this information when the a trivial enterprise. You shouldn’t discourage PCs from 
PCs give you an excuse to do so, rather than hoarding upgrading their own equipment from the plunder of 
it against all but precisely correct lines of investigation. the fallen or taking exceptionally valuable pieces for lat-

You also shouldn’t feel bad about giving PCs a er fencing, but you shouldn’t feel obligated to let them 
break if they start to flail, either by introducing a help- decamp with the battlefield on their backs.
ful NPC to put them back on the trail or remind them The actual mechanics of selling plunder can be as 
of some earlier point they didn’t fully investigate. By complicated as you wish to make them. It may be that 
the same token, you shouldn’t hesitate to let them deal what the PCs retrieve can be sold openly on the world, 
with the consequences of tardiness. If they spend too usually for around half its purchase value if a quick sale 
long in distractions before finding their urchin friend, is desired. Something closer to full price can only be ob-
they might discover nothing more than spare parts. tained with the sort of patience, contacts, and attention 

One particular point that often comes up is the that adventurers rarely have avaialble.
question of searching an area. Some GMs just let the A fence might be needed for those goods which 
PCs all make Notice checks to see if they notice some- were acquired in illicit fashion, or items that are out-
thing hidden. This has the advantage of being quick lawed for common trade. Fences rarely pay more than 
and simple, but it also can put vital information at the ten or twenty percent of an item’s purchase price. Many 
mercy of good dice. Other GMs require the players to such difficulties can be removed by taking the loot off-
specifically say what parts of an area they’re searching, world and laundering it somewhere beyond the reach 
what they’re looking under or inside, and otherwise of the planet’s laws.
describe the specifics of their search. This can penalize 
players who don’t correctly envision the area the GM 
is describing. One compromise is to simply give players 
vital clues when they say that they are searching, and 
then use one or both of the other methods to let them 
search for supplementary facts and helpful details.



Complications •235 

Interstellar Trade

As an extension of this, some groups will want to make More sinister than the Preceptors and the pious 
a killing in interstellar trade, carrying the goods of one are the “Kurtzes”. The prospect of ruling like a god on 
world to another to make a fast credit. This is a ven- some forgotten world lures a certain type of men and 
erable science-fiction trope, and there’s no reason you women, a type that might normally be forced to limit 
shouldn’t allow it, but there are a few considerations their dark ambitions on a more technically advanced 
to keep in mind when dealing with space commerce. world, where energy weapons and powered armor 

Perhaps most importantly, there is no such thing do not give a person so vast an advantage over their 
as interstellar bulk shipping in Stars Without Number. peers. These Kurtzes seek out lost worlds with other 
Even the largest spike drive ships have cargo capacities like-minded men and women, usually framing their 
measured in a few tens of thousands of tons, while a ambitions as a matter of “bringing advancement to the 
modern oil tanker has a capacity of around 500,000 primitives”. Most Kurtz expeditions collapse in blood 
tons. Trying to run a meaningful trade in bulk com- and horror within a few years, but some manage to 
modities has been a lost cause ever since the jump gates hold on for far longer. 
failed and massive system-ship freighters could no lon-
ger make the jump between worlds. Such commerce Quick Trade Rules
can exist inside a system, with huge slowboats moving For those who prefer not to use the full-fledged rules 
from planet to planet, but modern trade relies on car- for interstellar trade provided in the Suns of Gold sup-
rying small loads of high-value goods or expert services. plement, here are a few quick guidelines for responding 

Most small merchant ships such as the ones a PC to player interest in interstellar trade. They assume the 
group is likely to own rely on in-system supply runs as PCs have a ship, but are just scrounging for marginal 
their bread and butter. They cart loads of food, water, shipments and fast opportunities rather than taking 
replacement personnel, spare parts, and other life sup- advantage of a formal trade network and steady, reli-
port supplies out to remote asteroid mines, research able work contracts.
stations, and extraction plants. The pay is rarely much, First, let the PCs find a deal for some good that the 
but such supply run missions are excellent hooks for planet might reasonably produce. Cheap bulk goods 
dropping a group into the middle of some disaster. would run for 2d6 x 10 credits per ton, ordinary fin-

Trade beyond supply runs usually revolves around ished goods go for 2d6 x 100 credits per ton, and high-
moving local specialty tech or products. Local art, exot- tech, expensive products are 2d6 x 1,000 credits per ton. 
ic pharmaceuticals, high-quality technical specialties, or They can find a new deal with a week’s wait.
passengers with special skills who want to reach a par- PCs can try to improve the purchase price with 
ticular world all make up this class of trade. For most a Cha/Trade skill check opposed by the seller’s Wis/
purposes, it’s not necessary to really elaborate on the Trade skill roll. On a success, the price decreases by 10% 
specifics of this, though it can add flavor to make up a times the level of Trade skill the bargainer has. On a 
product or two unique to a given world. failure, the price remains firm.

There are also exceptionally risky trading expe- Before the goods are loaded, roll 1d6. If the PCs 
ditions to lostworlders, bringing the fruits of modern tried to get a better price, subtract 1 from the roll. If 
postech to their benighted nations. While the weapon- the result is 1 or less, something has gone wrong and 
ry, pharmaceuticals, and technical artifacts are usually the goods are lost, stolen, confiscated, or fake. The PCs 
greedily desired on these worlds, the natives often have are going to have to either eat the loss or take whatever 
very little of value to pay for them. Explorer-merchants adventurous steps are necessary to get their money or 
often have to investigate a lostworlder culture carefully goods back. These steps may involve gunfire.
before they can identify any particular product or re- When the PCs try to sell the goods, assuming the 
source that can be usefully shipped interstellar distanc- planet might reasonably want them, roll 2d6+1 and 
es to justify the trip. Some particularly unscrupulous multiply it by 10 for bulk goods, 100 for finished man-
merchants do not balk at taking payment in local slaves ufactures, or 1,000 for expensive goods. This is the base 
for export to decadent or dangerous worlds. price the buyer offers to the PCs. They can bargain for 

There are also “missionary” supply runs to these better with the same opposed check as before, gaining 
primitive worlds. The Preceptors of the Great Archive a 10% price increase per Trade skill level on a success. 
occasionally run missions on a planet to disseminate On a failure, the PCs have to accept the offered price.
valuable technical and artistic knowledge among the After the sale is finalized, the 1d6 needs to be rolled 
locals, and there are always a selection of determined again, also with a -1 penalty if a better price was sought. 
missionaries bent on bringing the word of their faith to On a result of 1 or less, the sale end of things goes awry, 
the heathens. While these missions normally can sup- and the PCs are out both money and goods. To salvage 
ply their own food, offworld medicine and spares are them, they’ll need to conduct some sort of adventure 
vital for keeping their more advanced tech operating. revolving around reclaiming their rightful due.



236• Converting First Edition

Converting First Edition Stars Without Number

Most of this edition’s content can be used interchange-
ably with first edition Stars Without Number. Charac- Converting Creatures
ters may be created somewhat differently, starships Flip Armor Classes to ascending values by subtracting 
might handle combat in a new way, and psionics might the creature’s AC from 20. No other changes are need-
have changed, but the end result largely uses the same ed; existing attack bonuses, hit dice, saving throws, and 
statistics and same score ranges. An original-edition so forth can be used as written.
Stars Without Number character can adventure in a re-
vised-edition campaign without requiring much in the Converting Ships
way of special rules. Give NPC ships an appropriate number of Command 

Some GMs will want guidelines on converting an Points to use each round in ship combat. Civilian ships 
existing original-edition game to the current edition. and fighters should have 4 CP, military ships and ex-
This is a simple process, as the scales are the same. perienced pirates should have 5 CP, and higher scores 

should be reserved for elite or spacer-native crews.
Converting Characters Adjust the ship’s maintenance cost based on the 
Characters have the same attributes, character level, new six-month maintenance schedule.
and all other scores unless specified otherwise. Skills Ship statistics such as hit points, speed, Power, 
are converted directly into the closest equivalent; Com- Mass, and other attributes are generally the same in 
bat/Projectile becomes Shoot, and so forth. In the case both editions. If the PCs build a new ship you can check 
of multiple skills now compressed into a single skill, it against the numbers, but existing ships can be left 
like a PC with both Combat/Projectile and Combat/ unchanged during use.
Energy, the highest skill is converted and the lower 
skills can be exchanged for any other skills of the same Converting Equipment
level of the player’s choice. Most equipment and weaponry can be used unchanged, 

PCs retain their class. Hit points are re-rolled for as they’re the same in both editions. You may need to 
the character based on their revised-edition hit die. use the revised edition version of a particular suit of 
Thus, a 5th level Psychic can reroll 5d6 for their hit armor or treat a monoblade as a medium advanced 
points. PCs may keep their existing hit point totals if weapon rather than a unique type of armament, but 
the new roll is lower. no real conversion is needed.

PCs may pick a number of foci appropriate to For melee weapons, give it the appropriate Shock 
their class and level. If converting a 2nd level War- rating for its size. Small weapons have Shock scores of 
rior, for example, the PC could pick their initial focus, 1/AC 15, medium weapons have scores of 2/13 AC, and 
their bonus Warrior focus, and the focus they get at large weapons have scores of 2/15 AC.
second level. If they pick foci that grant bonus skills, For gear that forces a saving throw on a target, 
apply the bonus as 3 additional skill points to the skill simply have the victim make whichever saving throw 
as described on page 57. seems most appropriate to the item’s effect. In case of 

PC experience points are pro-rated based on the Luck saves, substitute Mental saves or a pure blind 
campaign. If the character was halfway to 7th level in chance of 50% success.
the existing campaign, place their experience points 
halfway to 7th level under the revised rules. Using Existing Sourcebooks

Attack bonuses and Armor Class are calculated us- Existing Stars Without Number sourcebooks such as 
ing the new rules, as are saving throw scores. Suns of Gold, Skyward Steel, Starvation Cheap, and 

Darkness Visible can be used with few or no changes. 
Converting Psionics Most of the resources in these books were designed to 
The rules above are sufficient for converting most PCs, be used in a system-agnostic fashion, and the agency 
but the powers of Psychic PCs are a bit trickier. construction rules in Darkness Visible or the interstellar 

To get the PC’s psychic skill ratings, take their pri- trade rules in Suns of Gold can be employed without 
mary discipline, halve it, and round it up. Take their altering anything.
other disciplines, halve them, and round down. Thus, In a few cases, these sourcebooks may call for 
a PC with a primary Telepathy discpline of 9 and sec- checks from skills that have been changed in the revised 
ondary disciplines of Metapsionics 7 and Biopsionics edition. Simply use the new version’s skill in such cases; 
2 would be converted to Telepathy-5, Metapsionics-3 if Suns of Gold tells you to add a PC’s Business score to 
and Biopsionics-1. For disciplines above level-0, they some total, just add their Trade score instead.
can pick a free technique from each skill level they 
know, plus one additional technique for each discipline 
from any level they know. Calculate Effort normally.



House Rules •237 

House Rules and the Game

Stars Without Number derives from an old-school gam- Eliminate Psionics: Some GMs who want a more “hard 
ing tradition where house rules were almost universal. sci-fi” game might choose to ditch psionics from 
The basic chassis of the game is simple enough and the setting. In their absence, the Scream can sim-
rugged enough to handle all kinds of tweaks and ad- ply have been an alien energy pulse that shattered 
justments without collapsing, and it is your sacred and the Jump Gates and left the worlds of humankind 
inalienable right to bend the game in any direction you isolated for centuries. If you eliminate psychic PCs, 
wish if it improves your fun. however, you’ll want to take care that the group 

You are encouraged to try the rules as-written at has access to other healing resources, such as stims 
first, though, so you can be sure that you really do want and trained PC medics.
to change something. If you do decide to shuffle things Drop FTL Starflight: GMs who want to run a strict-
around, here are some possible house rules you could ly one-solar-system game might eliminate FTL 
adopt, and some suggestions about their effects. spaceflight as an option. The Engines of Babylon 

supplement for the original game discusses how to 
No Shock Damage: Weapons do not do Shock damage. change the starship rules for a TL3 campaign that 

This can simplify melee combat at the cost of dis- has edged into intra-system space flight.
couraging PCs from choosing to use melee weap- Boost Starting Levels: The default campaign assumes 
ons and increasing the “whiff” factor with them. that PCs will start at first level, as experienced 
If you drop Shock damage, you might also choose but extremely mortal heroes. Groups that want 
to drop the Snap Attack combat maneuver, as it’s to make room for a little more durability without 
no longer necessary to give gunslingers a way to using the heroic PC rules in the game’s deluxe ver-
blaze down charging melee attackers before they sion might choose to start at third level instead of 
get into range. first, or give a flat 10 HP bonus to all PCs.

Use Original Skill Lists: Like the skill list from the orig- Add Universal Psionics: A GM might choose to run a 
inal edition of SWN better? Use it instead. When campaign where every PC has some degree of 
creating characters, allow skill picks or rolls to psionic power. In such games, every PC should 
be converted to a corresponding original-edition get the bonus of being a Partial Psychic as given 
skill. If the PC rolls “Shoot”, for example, let them under the Adventurer class. Adventurers who 
pick Combat/Gunnery, Combat/Projectile, or choose the Partial Psychic option should be treat-
Combat/Energy instead. When the existing rules ed as full Psychics, and the full Psychic class itself is 
call for a particular new skill, let the PC use any old dropped. If using the space magic rules in the de-
skill that plausibly matches its function. luxe game version, the same method can be used 

Don’t Use Command Points: Don’t want to track Com- to add universal magic abilities to PCs, either as 
mand Points in ship combat? Eliminate all actions partial Magisters, Adepts, or Arcanists.
that grant Command Points and just let each PC Use Plot Points: Some groups prefer to have a certain 
pick one action from their department list each amount of narrative control given to the PCs, ei-
turn. The captain’s Support Department action ther to save them from otherwise-certain doom or 
now gives that department a bonus action, and allow them to make certain statements about the 
the gunner now has a Fire At A System action that situation that are automatically true. Under such 
lets them fire one weapon at a targeted system at circumstances, you might give each PC two “plot 
a -4 penalty to hit. NPC ships can either fire all points” that can be spent to save them when they 
weapons in a round or fire only one weapon and would otherwise certainly perish, or else make an 
take one action relevant to their immediate needs. adjustment to the current adventuring situation 

No Ranged Weapon Binding: One of the significant that the GM judges amenable. Each time the PC 
combat differences between the revised edition advances a level, these plot points reset. Any un-
of the game and the original is the rule limiting spent ones are lost.
the use of ranged weapons when a hostile melee Make Combat a Bloodbath: A few groups like to empha-
combatant is adjacent. Some GMs will want to size the abject horror and murderous danger of 
drop this rule for simplicity’s sake, and that can combat in their campaigns. For these groups, you 
work, but it may leave melee specialists feeling a can add the simple rule that every attack roll made 
little superfluous. on an even-numbered round of combat will au-

Use a Grid in Combat: While the game isn’t written tomatically hit unless there’s a penalty on the roll, 
around the use of miniatures and a combat grid, whether due to cover or circumstances. In that 
GMs who want to go to the extra effort of mak- case, the attack is rolled normally. PCs who get 
ing up such resources can do so. Using two-meter involved in combat thus know they have a very 
squares or hexes is likely to give the best results. limited amount of time to resolve the situation.



238• Name Generators

Name Generators

What’s in a name? For most campaigns, a very great 
deal. Names and naming conventions are an important Making Names Memorable
and useful tool for giving your worlds a sense of co- One difficulty that occasionally comes up at the table is 
herence and verisimilitude. It’s all too easy to fall into a difficulty in remembering names that don’t have any 
the easy convention of nonsense-syllable names when grounding in languages spoken by the players. With-
a GM can get much more world-building mileage out out any mnemonic hook or familiarity, one string of 
of a more thoughtful use of language. polysyllables tends to blur into another.

The names of people and places on a world should One way to get around this problem is to attach 
be in conformity with the local language. Every world strong visual or character cues to individual NPCs. 
is going to have its oddball names, but if the great ma- Players might not remember a particular spaceport 
jority of them share the same basic roots, it helps give hand’s name, but they’ll remember the guy who’s con-
the world a sense of cohesion and place. Even when the stantly smoking a reeking cheroot, or the woman with 
players have no knowledge whatsoever of the language fiber-optic laced hair. As the GM, you can help prevent 
or culture being used as a touchstone, using the same forgetfulness by using the NPC’s name regularly as well.
linguistic roots ensures that the same basic palette of 
sounds and word fragments will be used. Creating Alien Names

Note that language and culture are separable. Just One quick trick for creating wholly alien names is to 
because you’ve got a world flavored with Arabian-style hunt up a very obscure language online and just use 
architecture and kinship groupings, there’s no reason its words to name exotic entities and places. The play-
you can’t use French or Spanish for the language. A ers are unlikely to recognize Galatian or Gothic, so 
thousand-odd years in the far future, cultural trans- you spare yourself from carrying the implicit cultural 
mutations unimaginable to us at present have taken baggage of the tongue, but the language still retains a 
place throughout human space. There no doubt ex- characteristic set of sounds that will help maintain a 
ist centuries-old interstellar cultures that bear only a coherent aural landscape. Further “palette swaps” of 
vague resemblance to their original forms. Take ad- vowels, particular consonant clusters or the like can 
vantage of this to make your own life easier. make an “alien language” out of almost any speech.



Name Generators •239 

d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place

1-4 Aamir Aisha Abdel 1-2 Adan 51-52 Magrit
5-8 Ayub Alimah Awad 3-4 Ahsa 53-54 Masqat
9-12 Binyamin Badia Dahhak 5-6 Andalus 55-56 Misr
13-16 Efraim Bisharah Essa 7-8 Asmara 57-58 Muruni

17-20 Ibrahim Chanda Hanna 9-10 Asqlan 59-60 Qabis
21-24 Ilyas Daliya Harbi 11-12 Baqubah 61-62 Qina

25-28 Ismail Fatimah Hassan 13-14 Basit 63-64 Rabat
29-32 Jibril Ghania Isa 15-16 Baysan 65-66 Ramlah
33-36 Jumanah Halah Kasim 17-18 Baytlahm 67-68 Riyadh
37-40 Kazi Kaylah Katib 19-20 Bursaid 69-70 Sabtah

A
41-44 Lut Khayrah Khalil 21-22 Dahilah 71-72 Salalah

r
a 45-48 Matta Layla Malik 23-24 Darasalam 73-74 Sana

b 49-52 Mohammed Mina Mansoor 25-26 Dawhah 75-76 Sinqit
i 53-56 Mubarak Munisa Mazin 27-28 Ganin 77-78 Suqutrah
c 57-60 Mustafa Mysha Musa 29-30 Gebal 79-80 Sur

61-64 Nazir Naimah Najeeb 31-32 Gibuti 81-82 Tabuk
65-68 Rahim Nissa Namari 33-34 Giddah 83-84 Tangah
69-72 Reza Nura Naser 35-36 Harmah 85-86 Tarifah
73-76 Sharif Parveen Rahman 37-38 Hartum 87-88 Tarrakunah
77-80 Taimur Rana Rasheed 39-40 Hibah 89-90 Tisit
81-84 Usman Shalha Saleh 41-42 Hims 91-92 Uman

85-88 Yakub Suhira Salim 43-44 Hubar 93-94 Urdunn
89-92 Yusuf Tahirah Shadi 45-46 Karbala 95-96 Wasqah
93-96 Zakariya Yasmin Sulaiman 47-48 Kut 97-98 Yaburah
97-100 Zubair Zulehka Tabari 49-50 Lacant 99-100 Yaman

1-4 Aiguo Biyu Bai 1-2 Andong 51-52 Luzhou
5-8 Bohai Changying Cao 3-4 Anqing 53-54 Ningxia
9-12 Chao Daiyu Chen 5-6 Anshan 55-56 Pingxiang
13-16 Dai Huidai Cui 7-8 Chaoyang 57-58 Pizhou

17-20 Dawei Huiliang Ding 9-10 Chaozhou 59-60 Qidong
21-24 Duyi Jia Du 11-12 Chifeng 61-62 Qingdao

25-28 Fa Jingfei Fang 13-14 Dalian 63-64 Qinghai
29-32 Fu Lan Fu 15-16 Dunhuang 65-66 Rehe
33-36 Gui Liling Guo 17-18 Fengjia 67-68 Shanxi
37-40 Hong Liu Han 19-20 Fengtian 69-70 Taiyuan

C
41-44 Jianyu Meili Hao 21-22 Fuliang 71-72 Tengzhou

h
i 45-48 Kang Niu Huang 23-24 Fushun 73-74 Urumqi

n 49-52 Li Peizhi Lei 25-26 Gansu 75-76 Weifang
e 53-56 Niu Qiao Li 27-28 Ganzhou 77-78 Wugang
s 57-60 Peng Qing Liang 29-30 Guizhou 79-80 Wuxi
e

61-64 Quan Ruolan Liu 31-32 Hotan 81-82 Xiamen
65-68 Ru Shu Long 33-34 Hunan 83-84 Xian
69-72 Shen Suyin Song 35-36 Jinan 85-86 Xikang
73-76 Shi Ting Tan 37-38 Jingdezhen 87-88 Xining
77-80 Song Xia Tang 39-40 Jinxi 89-90 Xinjiang
81-84 Tao Xiaowen Wang 41-42 Jinzhou 91-92 Yidu

85-88 Xue Xiulan Wu 43-44 Kunming 93-94 Yingkou
89-92 Yi Ya Xing 45-46 Liaoning 95-96 Yuxi
93-96 Yuan Ying Yang 47-48 Linyi 97-98 Zigong
97-100 Zian Zhilan Zhang 49-50 Lushun 99-100 Zoige



240• Name Generators

d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place

1-4 Adam Abigail Barker 1-2 Aldington 51-52 Kedington
5-8 Albert Anne Brown 3-4 Appleton 53-54 Latchford
9-12 Alfred Beatrice Butler 5-6 Ashdon 55-56 Leigh
13-16 Allan Blanche Carter 7-8 Berwick 57-58 Leighton

17-20 Archibald Catherine Chapman 9-10 Bramford 59-60 Maresfield
21-24 Arthur Charlotte Collins 11-12 Brimstage 61-62 Markshall

25-28 Basil Claire Cook 13-14 Carden 63-64 Netherpool
29-32 Charles Eleanor Davies 15-16 Churchill 65-66 Newton
33-36 Colin Elizabeth Gray 17-18 Clifton 67-68 Oxton

E 37-40 Donald Emily Green 19-20 Colby 69-70 Preston
n 41-44 Douglas Emma Harris 21-22 Copford 71-72 Ridley
g

45-48 Edgar Georgia Jackson 23-24 Cromer 73-74 Rochford
l

49-52 Edmund Harriet Jones 25-26 Davenham 75-76 Seaford
i

53-56 Edward Joan Lloyd 27-28 Dersingham 77-78 Selsey
s
h 57-60 George Judy Miller 29-30 Doverdale 79-80 Stanton

61-64 Harold Julia Roberts 31-32 Elsted 81-82 Stockham
65-68 Henry Lucy Smith 33-34 Ferring 83-84 Stoke
69-72 Ian Lydia Taylor 35-36 Gissing 85-86 Sutton
73-76 James Margaret Thomas 37-38 Heydon 87-88 Thakeham
77-80 John Mary Turner 39-40 Holt 89-90 Thetford
81-84 Lewis Molly Watson 41-42 Hunston 91-92 Thorndon

85-88 Oliver Nora White 43-44 Hutton 93-94 Ulting
89-92 Philip Rosie Williams 45-46 Inkberrow 95-96 Upton
93-96 Richard Sarah Wood 47-48 Inworth 97-98 Westhorpe
97-100 William Victoria Young 49-50 Isfield 99-100 Worcester

1-4 Alexander Alexandra Andreas 1-2 Adramyttion 51-52 Kallisto
5-8 Alexius Amalia Argyros 3-4 Ainos 53-54 Katerini
9-12 Anastasius Callisto Dimitriou 5-6 Alikarnassos 55-56 Kithairon
13-16 Christodoulos Charis Floros 7-8 Avydos 57-58 Kydonia

17-20 Christos Chloe Gavras 9-10 Dakia 59-60 Lakonia
21-24 Damian Dorothea Ioannidis 11-12 Dardanos 61-62 Leros

25-28 Dimitris Elena Katsaros 13-14 Dekapoli 63-64 Lesvos
29-32 Dysmas Eudoxia Kyrkos 15-16 Dodoni 65-66 Limnos
33-36 Elias Giada Leventis 17-18 Efesos 67-68 Lykia
37-40 Giorgos Helena Makris 19-20 Efstratios 69-70 Megara
41-44 Ioannis Ioanna Metaxas 21-22 Elefsina 71-72 Messene

G
r 45-48 Konstantinos Lydia Nikolaidis 23-24 Ellada 73-74 Milos

e 49-52 Lambros Melania Pallis 25-26 Epidavros 75-76 Nikaia
e 53-56 Leonidas Melissa Pappas 27-28 Erymanthos 77-78 Orontis
k 57-60 Marcos Nika Petrou 29-30 Evripos 79-80 Parnasos

61-64 Miltiades Nikolina Raptis 31-32 Gavdos 81-82 Petro
65-68 Nestor Olympias Simonides 33-34 Gytheio 83-84 Samos
69-72 Nikos Philippa Spiros 35-36 Ikaria 85-86 Syros
73-76 Orestes Phoebe Stavros 37-38 Ilios 87-88 Thapsos
77-80 Petros Sophia Stephanidis 39-40 Illyria 89-90 Thessalia
81-84 Simon Theodora Stratigos 41-42 Iraia 91-92 Thira

85-88 Stavros Valentina Terzis 43-44 Irakleio 93-94 Thiva
89-92 Theodore Valeria Theodorou 45-46 Isminos 95-96 Varvara
93-96 Vassilios Yianna Vasiliadis 47-48 Ithaki 97-98 Voiotia
97-100 Yannis Zoe Yannakakis 49-50 Kadmeia 99-100 Vyvlos



Name Generators •241 

d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place

1-4 Amrit Amala Achari 1-2 Ahmedabad 51-52 Jaisalmer
5-8 Ashok Asha Banerjee 3-4 Alipurduar 53-54 Jharonda
9-12 Chand Chandra Bhatnagar 5-6 Alubari 55-56 Kadambur
13-16 Dinesh Devika Bose 7-8 Anjanadri 57-58 Kalasipalyam

17-20 Gobind Esha Chauhan 9-10 Ankleshwar 59-60 Karnataka
21-24 Harinder Gita Chopra 11-12 Balarika 61-62 Kutchuhery

25-28 Jagdish Indira Das 13-14 Bhanuja 63-64 Lalgola
29-32 Johar Indrani Dutta 15-16 Bhilwada 65-66 Mainaguri
33-36 Kurien Jaya Gupta 17-18 Brahmaghosa 67-68 Nainital
37-40 Lakshman Jayanti Johar 19-20 Bulandshahar 69-70 Nandidurg

I 41-44 Madhav Kiri Kapoor 21-22 Candrama 71-72 Narayanadri
n

45-48 Mahinder Lalita Mahajan 23-24 Chalisgaon 73-74 Panipat
d

49-52 Mohal Malati Malhotra 25-26 Chandragiri 75-76 Panjagutta
i

53-56 Narinder Mira Mehra 27-28 Charbagh 77-78 Pathankot
a
n 57-60 Nikhil Mohana Nehru 29-30 Chayanka 79-80 Pathardih

61-64 Omrao Neela Patil 31-32 Chittorgarh 81-82 Porbandar
65-68 Prasad Nita Rao 33-34 Dayabasti 83-84 Rajasthan
69-72 Pratap Rajani Saxena 35-36 Dikpala 85-86 Renigunta
73-76 Ranjit Sarala Shah 37-38 Ekanga 87-88 Sewagram
77-80 Sanjay Sarika Sharma 39-40 Gandhidham 89-90 Shakurbasti
81-84 Shankar Sheela Singh 41-42 Gollaprolu 91-92 Siliguri

85-88 Thakur Sunita Trivedi 43-44 Grahisa 93-94 Sonepat
89-92 Vijay Trishna Venkatesan 45-46 Guwahati 95-96 Teliwara
93-96 Vipul Usha Verma 47-48 Haridasva 97-98 Tinpahar
97-100 Yash Vasanta Yadav 49-50 Indraprastha 99-100 Villivakkam

1-4 Akira Aemi Abe 1-2 Bando 51-52 Mitsukaido
5-8 Daisuke Airi Arakaki 3-4 Chikuma 53-54 Moriya
9-12 Fukashi Ako Endo 5-6 Chikusei 55-56 Nagano
13-16 Goro Ayu Fujiwara 7-8 Chino 57-58 Naka

17-20 Hiro Chikaze Goto 9-10 Hitachi 59-60 Nakano
21-24 Hiroya Eriko Ito 11-12 Hitachinaka 61-62 Ogi

25-28 Hotaka Hina Kikuchi 13-14 Hitachiomiya 63-64 Okaya
29-32 Katsu Kaori Kinjo 15-16 Hitachiota 65-66 Omachi
33-36 Katsuto Keiko Kobayashi 17-18 Iida 67-68 Ryugasaki

J
37-40 Keishuu Kyouka Koga 19-20 Iiyama 69-70 Saku

a
41-44 Kyuuto Mayumi Komatsu 21-22 Ina 71-72 Settsu

p
a 45-48 Mikiya Miho Maeda 23-24 Inashiki 73-74 Shimotsuma

n 49-52 Mitsunobu Namiko Nakamura 25-26 Ishioka 75-76 Shiojiri
e 53-56 Mitsuru Natsu Narita 27-28 Itako 77-78 Suwa
s 57-60 Naruhiko Nobuko Ochi 29-30 Kamisu 79-80 Suzaka
e

61-64 Nobu Rei Oshiro 31-32 Kasama 81-82 Takahagi
65-68 Shigeo Ririsa Saito 33-34 Kashima 83-84 Takeo
69-72 Shigeto Sakimi Sakamoto 35-36 Kasumigaura 85-86 Tomi
73-76 Shou Shihoko Sato 37-38 Kitaibaraki 87-88 Toride
77-80 Shuji Shika Suzuki 39-40 Kiyose 89-90 Tsuchiura
81-84 Takaharu Tsukiko Takahashi 41-42 Koga 91-92 Tsukuba

85-88 Teruaki Tsuzune Tanaka 43-44 Komagane 93-94 Ueda
89-92 Tetsushi Yoriko Watanabe 45-46 Komoro 95-96 Ushiku
93-96 Tsukasa Yorimi Yamamoto 47-48 Matsumoto 97-98 Yoshikawa
97-100 Yasuharu Yoshiko Yamasaki 49-50 Mito 99-100 Yuki



242• Name Generators

d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place

1-4 Agrippa Appia Antius 1-2 Abilia 51-52 Lucus
5-8 Appius Aula Aurius 3-4 Alsium 53-54 Lugdunum
9-12 Aulus Caesula Barbatius 5-6 Aquileia 55-56 Mediolanum
13-16 Caeso Decima Calidius 7-8 Argentoratum 57-58 Novaesium

17-20 Decimus Fausta Cornelius 9-10 Ascrivium 59-60 Patavium
21-24 Faustus Gaia Decius 11-12 Asculum 61-62 Pistoria

25-28 Gaius Gnaea Fabius 13-14 Attalia 63-64 Pompeii
29-32 Gnaeus Hosta Flavius 15-16 Barium 65-66 Raurica
33-36 Hostus Lucia Galerius 17-18 Batavorum 67-68 Rigomagus
37-40 Lucius Maio Horatius 19-20 Belum 69-70 Roma
41-44 Mamercus Marcia Julius 21-22 Bobbium 71-72 Salernum

L
a 45-48 Manius Maxima Juventius 23-24 Brigantium 73-74 Salona

t 49-52 Marcus Mettia Licinius 25-26 Burgodunum 75-76 Segovia
i 53-56 Mettius Nona Marius 27-28 Camulodunum 77-78 Sirmium
n 57-60 Nonus Numeria Minicius 29-30 Clausentum 79-80 Spalatum

61-64 Numerius Octavia Nerius 31-32 Corduba 81-82 Tarraco
65-68 Opiter Postuma Octavius 33-34 Coriovallum 83-84 Treverorum
69-72 Paulus Prima Pompeius 35-36 Durucobrivis 85-86 Verulamium
73-76 Proculus Procula Quinctius 37-38 Eboracum 87-88 Vesontio
77-80 Publius Septima Rutilius 39-40 Emona 89-90 Vetera
81-84 Quintus Servia Sextius 41-42 Florentia 91-92 Vindelicorum

85-88 Servius Tertia Titius 43-44 Lactodurum 93-94 Vindobona
89-92 Tiberius Tiberia Ulpius 45-46 Lentia 95-96 Vinovia
93-96 Titus Titia Valerius 47-48 Lindum 97-98 Viroconium
97-100 Volescus Vibia Vitellius 49-50 Londinium 99-100 Volubilis

1-4 Adesegun Abike Adegboye 1-2 Abadan 51-52 Jere
5-8 Akintola Adesuwa Adeniyi 3-4 Ador 53-54 Kalabalge
9-12 Amabere Adunola Adeyeku 5-6 Agatu 55-56 Katsina
13-16 Arikawe Anguli Adunola 7-8 Akamkpa 57-58 Knoduga

17-20 Asagwara Arewa Agbaje 9-10 Akpabuyo 59-60 Konshishatse
21-24 Chidubem Asari Akpan 11-12 Ala 61-62 Kukawa

25-28 Chinedu Bisola Akpehi 13-14 Askira 63-64 Kwande
29-32 Chiwetei Chioma Aliki 15-16 Bakassi 65-66 Kwayakusar
33-36 Damilola Eduwa Asuni 17-18 Bama 67-68 Logo

N 37-40 Esangbedo Emilohi Babangida 19-20 Bayo 69-70 Mafa
i 41-44 Ezenwoye Fehintola Ekim 21-22 Bekwara 71-72 Makurdi
g

45-48 Folarin Folasade Ezeiruaku 23-24 Biase 73-74 Nganzai
e

49-52 Genechi Mahparah Fabiola 25-26 Boki 75-76 Obanliku
r

53-56 Idowu Minika Fasola 27-28 Buruku 77-78 Obi
i
a 57-60 Kelechi Nkolika Nwokolo 29-30 Calabar 79-80 Obubra

n 61-64 Ketanndu Nkoyo Nzeocha 31-32 Chibok 81-82 Obudu
65-68 Melubari Nuanae Ojo 33-34 Damboa 83-84 Odukpani
69-72 Nkanta Obioma Okonkwo 35-36 Dikwa 85-86 Ogbadibo
73-76 Obafemi Olafemi Okoye 37-38 Etung 87-88 Ohimini
77-80 Olatunde Shanumi Olaniyan 39-40 Gboko 89-90 Okpokwu
81-84 Olumide Sominabo Olawale 41-42 Gubio 91-92 Otukpo

85-88 Tombari Suliat Olumese 43-44 Guzamala 93-94 Shani
89-92 Udofia Tariere Onajobi 45-46 Gwoza 95-96 Ugep
93-96 Uyoata Temedire Soyinka 47-48 Hawul 97-98 Vandeikya
97-100 Uzochi Yemisi Yamusa 49-50 Ikom 99-100 Yala



Name Generators •243 

d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place

1-4 Aleksandr Aleksandra Abelev 1-2 Amur 51-52 Omsk
5-8 Andrei Anastasia Bobrikov 3-4 Arkhangelsk 53-54 Orenburg
9-12 Arkady Anja Chemerkin 5-6 Astrakhan 55-56 Oryol
13-16 Boris Catarina Gogunov 7-8 Belgorod 57-58 Penza

17-20 Dmitri Devora Gurov 9-10 Bryansk 59-60 Perm
21-24 Dominik Dima Iltchenko 11-12 Chelyabinsk 61-62 Pskov

25-28 Grigory Ekaterina Kavelin 13-14 Chita 63-64 Rostov
29-32 Igor Eva Komarov 15-16 Gorki 65-66 Ryazan
33-36 Ilya Irina Korovin 17-18 Irkutsk 67-68 Sakhalin

R 37-40 Ivan Karolina Kurnikov 19-20 Ivanovo 69-70 Samara
u 41-44 Kiril Katlina Lebedev 21-22 Kaliningrad 71-72 Saratov
s

45-48 Konstantin Kira Litvak 23-24 Kaluga 73-74 Smolensk
s

49-52 Leonid Ludmilla Mekhdiev 25-26 Kamchatka 75-76 Sverdlovsk
i

53-56 Nikolai Mara Muraviov 27-28 Kemerovo 77-78 Tambov
a
n 57-60 Oleg Nadezdha Nikitin 29-30 Kirov 79-80 Tomsk

61-64 Pavel Nastassia Ortov 31-32 Kostroma 81-82 Tula
65-68 Petr Natalya Peshkov 33-34 Kurgan 83-84 Tver
69-72 Sergei Oksana Romasko 35-36 Kursk 85-86 Tyumen
73-76 Stepan Olena Shvedov 37-38 Leningrad 87-88 Ulyanovsk
77-80 Valentin Olga Sikorski 39-40 Lipetsk 89-90 Vladimir
81-84 Vasily Sofia Stolypin 41-42 Magadan 91-92 Volgograd

85-88 Viktor Svetlana Turov 43-44 Moscow 93-94 Vologda
89-92 Yakov Tatyana Volokh 45-46 Murmansk 95-96 Voronezh
93-96 Yegor Vilma Zaitsev 47-48 Novgorod 97-98 Vyborg
97-100 Yuri Yelena Zhukov 49-50 Novosibirsk 99-100 Yaroslavl

1-4 Alejandro Adalina Arellano 1-2 Aguascebas 51-52 Loreto
5-8 Alonso Aleta Arispana 3-4 Alcazar 53-54 Lujar
9-12 Amelio Ana Borrego 5-6 Barranquete 55-56 Marbela
13-16 Armando Ascencion Carderas 7-8 Bravatas 57-58 Matagorda

17-20 Bernardo Beatriz Carranzo 9-10 Cabezudos 59-60 Nacimiento
21-24 Carlos Carmela Cordova 11-12 Calderon 61-62 Niguelas

25-28 Cesar Celia Enciso 13-14 Cantera 63-64 Ogijares
29-32 Diego Dolores Espejo 15-16 Castillo 65-66 Ortegicar
33-36 Emilio Elena Gavilan 17-18 Delgadas 67-68 Pampanico
37-40 Estevan Emelina Guerra 19-20 Donablanca 69-70 Pelado

S
41-44 Felipe Felipa Guillen 21-22 Encinetas 71-72 Quesada

p
a 45-48 Francisco Inez Huertas 23-24 Estrella 73-74 Quintera

n 49-52 Guillermo Isabel Illan 25-26 Faustino 75-76 Riguelo
i 53-56 Javier Jacinta Jurado 27-28 Fuentebravia 77-78 Ruescas
s 57-60 Jose Lucia Moretta 29-30 Gafarillos 79-80 Salteras
h

61-64 Juan Lupe Motolinia 31-32 Gironda 81-82 Santopitar
65-68 Julio Maria Pancorbo 33-34 Higueros 83-84 Taberno
69-72 Luis Marta Paredes 35-36 Huelago 85-86 Torres
73-76 Pedro Nina Quesada 37-38 Humilladero 87-88 Umbrete
77-80 Raul Paloma Roma 39-40 Illora 89-90 Valdecazorla
81-84 Ricardo Rafaela Rubiera 41-42 Isabela 91-92 Velez

85-88 Salvador Soledad Santoro 43-44 Izbor 93-94 Vistahermosa
89-92 Santiago Teresa Torrillas 45-46 Jandilla 95-96 Yeguas
93-96 Valeriano Valencia Vera 47-48 Jinetes 97-98 Zahora
97-100 Vicente Zenaida Vivero 49-50 Limones 99-100 Zumeta



244• One-Roll NPCs

One-Roll NPCs

There will be times when a GM needs an NPC on short 
notice. The preceding name generators can be used in d4 Age

conjunction with these tables to quickly produce a mi- 1 Unusually young or old for their role
nor fill-in character for your adventure. Simply roll one 2 Young adult
of each type of die: d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20. Match 
them to the tables, smooth over any rough joins, and 3 Mature prime
you have your instant NPC. 4 Middle-aged or elderly

When combat statistics are needed, just apply the 
most pertinent stat line from page 195 and assume they 
have whatever weaponry, armor, or other personal d12 Their Greatest Desire

possessions might be appropriate for someone in their 1 They want a particular romantic partner
social circumstance. 2 They want money for them or a loved one

3 They want a promotion in their job
4 They want answers about a past trauma
5 They want revenge on an enemy

d6 Their Background 6 They want to help a beleaguered friend
1 The local underclass or poorest natives 7 They want an entirely different job
2 Common laborers or cube workers 8 They want protection from an enemy
3 Aspiring bourgeoise or upper class 9 They want to leave their current life
4 The elite of this society 10 They want fame and glory
5 Minority or foreigners; reroll on 1d4 11 They want power over those around them
6 Offworlders or exotics; reroll on 1d4 12 They have everything they want from life

d8 Their Role in Society d20 Most Obvious Character Trait

1 Criminal, thug, thief, swindler 1 Ambition
2 Menial, cleaner, retail worker, servant 2 Avarice
3 Unskilled heavy labor, porter, construction 3 Bitterness
4 Skilled trade, electrician, mechanic, pilot 4 Courage
5 Idea worker, programmer, writer 5 Cowardice
6 Merchant, business owner, trader, banker 6 Curiosity
7 Official, bureaucrat, courtier, clerk 7 Deceitfulness
8 Military, soldier, enforcer, law officer

8 Determination
9 Devotion to a cause

d10 Their Biggest Problem
10 Filiality

1 They have significant debt or money woes
11 Hatred

2 A loved one is in trouble; reroll for it
12 Honesty

3 Romantic failure with a desired person 13 Hopefulness
4 Drug or behavioral addiction 14 Love of a person
5 Their superior dislikes or resents them 15 Nihilism
6 They have a persistent sickness 16 Paternalism
7 They hate their job or life situation 17 Pessimism
8 Someone dangerous is targeting them 18 Protectiveness
9 They’re pursuing a disastrous purpose 19 Resentment
10 They have no problems worth mentioning 20 Shame



One-Roll Patrons •245 

One-Roll Patrons

PCs often need patrons to aim them at adventures or 
offer suitable recompense for semi-legal favors. In con- d4 Patron Eagerness to Hire

junction with the adjacent one-roll NPC tables, you can 1 Cautious, but can be convinced to hire
use the tools below to quickly generate a patron and 2 Willing to promise standard rates
what it is they want from the party.

One particularly convenient technique is to have 3 Eager, willing to offer a bonus
a few short filler adventures drawn up as described on 4 Desperate, might offer what they can’t pay
page 177, and then when the players suddenly need 
a job or need a favor that only a cooperative patron 
could provide, use the patron to hook them up with d12 Potential Non-Cash Rewards

the filler adventure. If you lack a convenient premade 1 Government official favors owed
adventure, it’s usually most practical to have the patron 2 Property in the area
request some simple, direct, one-scene job that you feel 

3 An item very valuable on another world
comfortable in running on the fly. You can consult page 
178 to find appropriate pay rates for different patrons. 4 Pretech mod components

5 Useful pretech artifact
d6 Patron Trustworthiness 6 Information the PCs need

1 They intend to totally screw the PCs 7 Membership in a powerful group
2 They won’t pay unless forced to do so 8 Black market access
3 They’ll pay slowly or reluctantly 9 Use of restricted facilities or shipyards
4 They’ll pay, but discount for mistakes 10 Shares in a profitable business
5 They’ll pay without quibbling 11 Maps to a hidden or guarded treasure
6 They’ll pay more than they promised 12 Illegal but valuable weapons or gear

d8 Basic Challenge of the Job d20 Complication to the Job

1 Kill somebody who might deserve it 1 An ambush is laid somewhere
2 Kidnap someone dangerous 2 PC involvement is leaked to the enemy
3 Steal a well-guarded object 3 The patron gives faulty aid somehow
4 Arson or sabotage on a place 4 Failing would be extremely unhealthy
5 Get proof of some misdeed 5 The job IDs them as allies of a local faction
6 Protect someone from an immediate threat 6 The macguffin is physically dangerous
7 Transport someone through danger 7 An important location is hard to get into
8 Guard an object being transported

8 Succeeding would be morally distasteful
9 A supposed ally is very unhelpful or stupid

d10 Main Countervailing Force
10 The patron badly misunderstood the PCs

1 A treacherous employer or subordinate
11 The job changes suddenly partway through

2 An open and known enemy of the patron
12 An unexpected troublemaker is involved

3 Official governmental meddling 13 Critical gear will fail partway through
4 An unknown rival of the patron 14 An unrelated accident complicates things
5 The macguffin itself opposes them 15 Payment comes in a hard-to-handle form
6 Very short time frame allowed 16 Someone is turning traitor on the patron
7 The job is spectacularly illegal 17 A critical element has suddenly moved
8 A participant would profit by their failure 18 Payment is in avidly-pursued hot goods
9 The patron is badly wrong about a thing 19 The true goal is a subsidiary part of the job
10 The locals are against the patron 20 No complications; it’s just as it seems to be



246• One-Roll Urban Encounters

One-Roll Urban Encounters

There are inevitably times when a GM needs some-
thing to distract the PCs quickly. A quick encounter, d4 What’s the Conflict About?

whether in the urban jungles or the alien wastes, can 1 Money, extortion, payment due, debts
buy a GM the time they need to puzzle out some larger 2 Respect, submission to social authority
problem. The tables here can be used to create a simple 
urban event to occupy the PCs for a little while. 3 Grudges, ethnic resentment, gang payback

The exact details of the event will have to be sup- 4 Politics, religion, or other ideology
plied by the GM in such a way as to fit the planet’s 
culture and situation, but the goal of the tables is to 
provide a fast conflict that the PCs can interact with d12 What Antagonists are Involved?

meaningfully. If the PCs resist the hook, it’s a relatively 1 A local bully and their thugs
simple matter to make the avoidance of it enough of a 2 A ruthless political boss and their zealots
challenge that it buys you the time you needed in the 

3 Violent criminals
first place. Don’t force the PCs to engage with it, but 
let them work a little to get free. 4 Religious fanatics

5 A blisteringly obnoxious offworlder
d6 General Venue of the Event 6 Corrupt or over-strict government official

1 In the middle of the street 7 A mob of intoxicated locals
2 In a public plaza 8 A ranting demagogue and their followers
3 Down a side alley 9 A stupidly bull-headed local grandee
4 Inside a local business 10 A very capable assassin or strong-arm
5 Next to or in a public park 11 A self-centered local scion of power
6 At a mass-transit station 12 A confused foreigner or backwoodsman

d8 Why are the PCs Involved? d20 Relevant Urban Features

1 A sympathetic participant appeals to them 1 Heavy traffic running through the place
2 Ways around it are all dangerous/blocked 2 Music blaring at deafening volumes
3 It happens immediately around them 3 Two groups present that detest each other
4 A valuable thing looks snatchable amid it 4 Large delivery taking place right there
5 A participant offers a reward for help 5 Swarm of schoolkids or feral youth
6 Someone mistakenly involves the PCs in it 6 Insistent soapbox preacher here
7 The seeming way out just leads deeper in 7 Several pickpockets working the crowd
8 Responsibility is somehow pinned on them

8 A kiosk is tipping over and spilling things
9 Streetlights are out or visibility is low

d10 What’s the Nature of the Event?
10 A cop patrol is here and reluctant to act

1 A parade or festival is being disrupted
11 PC-hostile reporters are recording here

2 Innocents are being assaulted
12 Someone’s trying to sell something to PCs

3 An establishment is being robbed 13 Feral dogs or other animals crowd here
4 A disturbance over local politics happens 14 Unrelated activists are protesting here
5 Someone is being blamed for something 15 Street kids are trying to steal from the PCs
6 Fires or building collapses are happening 16 GPS maps are dangerously wrong here
7 A medical emergency is happening 17 Downed power lines are a danger here
8 Someone’s trying to cheat the PCs 18 Numerous open manholes and utility holes
9 A vehicle accident is happening 19 The street’s blockaded by something
10 A religious ceremony is being disrupted 20 Crowds so thick one can barely move



One-Roll Wilderness Encounters •247 

One-Roll Wilderness Encounters

Building appropriate wilderness encounters will vary 
greatly with the planet in question, but the tables below d4 Initial Encounter Range

assume that the wilderness is on an inhabited world 1 Visible from a long distance away
with some vague analogs to Terran terrain and veg- 2 Noticed 1d4 hundred meters away
etation. If the world is devoid of human inhabitants, 
replace the features with alien relics or the remnants 3 Noticed only within 1d6 x 10 meters
of scouts or lost colonies. 4 Noticed only when adjacent to the event

The tables below provide a suggested time of day 
and initial distance for the encounter, but these base-
lines will vary depending on the choices and capabilities d12 Types of Hostile Creatures

of the PCs. Some encounters are unlikely to occur at 1 Bandits in their wilderness hideout
night, unless the parties involved are traveling or oth- 2 Dangerous locals looking for easy marks
erwise active despite the dark. Suggestions are given 

3 Rabid or diseased large predator
for likely-hostile and likely-friendly creatures, but a 
reaction roll will influence attitudes greatly. 4 Pack of hungry hunting beasts

5 Herd of potentially dangerous prey animals
d6 Weather and Lighting 6 Swarm of dangerous vermin

1 Takes place in daylight and clear weather 7 Criminal seeking to evade the law
2 Daylight, but fog, mist, rain or the like 8 Brutal local landowner and their men
3 Daylight, but harsh seasonal weather 9 Crazed hermit seeking enforced solitude
4 Night encounter, but clear weather 10 Friendly-seeming guide into lethal danger
5 Night, with rain or other obscuring effects 11 Harmless-looking but dangerous beast
6 Night, with terrible weather and wind 12 Confidence man seeking to gull the PCs

d8 Basic Nature of the Encounter d20 Specific Nearby Feature of Relevance

1 Attack by pack of hostiles 1 Overgrown homestead
2 Ambush by single lone hostile 2 Stream prone to flash-flooding
3 Meet people who don’t want to be met 3 Narrow bridge or beam over deep cleft
4 Encounter people in need of aid 4 Box canyon with steep sides
5 Encounter hostile creatures 5 Unstable hillside that slides if disturbed
6 Nearby feature is somehow dangerous 6 Long-lost crash site of a gravflyer
7 Nearby feature promises useful loot 7 Once-inhabited cave or tunnel
8 Meet hostiles that aren’t immediately so

8 Steep and dangerous cliff
9 Quicksand-laden swamp or dust pit

d10 Types of Friendly Creatures
10 Ruins of a ghost town or lost hamlet

1 Affable but reclusive hermit
11 Hunting cabin with necessities

2 Local herd animal let loose to graze
12 Ill-tended graveyard of a lost family stead

3 Government ranger or circuit judge 13 Narrow pass that’s easily blocked
4 Curious local animal 14 Dilapidated resort building
5 Remote homesteader and family 15 Remote government monitoring outpost
6 Working trapper or hunter 16 Illicit substance farm or processing center
7 Back-country villager or native 17 Old and forgotten battleground
8 Hiker or wilderness tourist 18 Zone overrun by dangerous plants
9 Religious recluse or holy person 19 Thick growth that lights up at a spark
10 Impoverished social exile 20 Abandoned vehicle



248• Transhuman Campaigns

TRANSHUMAN CAMPAIGNS
Technology has changed many lives at the far reaches just can’t be made without the exertion of human la-
of human space, but people in most sectors still live in bor. Some things are so cheap as to be functionally free, 
ways their ancestors would find comprehensible. They but most of the the most highly desirable objects in 
may struggle with alien perils and leap from star to the campaign still require money to purchase them, 
star in engines of ineffable technology, but they worry and the pursuit of riches is still a meaningful pastime 
about money, grow old, and quarrel over the finite re- for some. While human minds can be swapped from 
sources of a limited cosmos. These human experiences body to body, duplication of a brain is impossible due 
remain almost universal. to quantum entanglement, so there is only ever one 

These experiences are almost universal. In some instance of a given mind in existence at any one time. 
sectors, the particular texture of metadimensional Artificial intelligence exists, but is neither as common 
space has allowed for the development of fantastically nor as powerful as it is in a hard setting.
advanced matter manipulators and mind-corpus inter- Your choice of campaign styles will depend on the 
faces. In these sectors, conventional concerns of old kind of play you want to have in your game. If you want 
age and poverty have given way to a strange transhu- money to still be a meaningful motivation in your game 
man existence of body-swapping intellects and savage and would prefer not to deal with the ethical and social 
conflicts over ideas rather than wealth. At the seeming complexities of mind duplication, then a soft campaign 
threshold of humanity’s transcendence, these transhu- might suit your purposes best. If you and your players 
man societies now struggle to determine which view of are eager to explore the high weirdness of civilizations 
human nature will dominate in the singularity to come. where money is meaningless and your basic identity is 

For most GMs, these esoteric battles can be con- a duplicable commodity, then a hard game might better 
veniently shuffled off to some far-distant sector of no serve your ends.
relevance to their campaign. They don’t want to run 
games about such things, and at most these transhu- Technology in the Campaign
mans might appear as enigmatic alien interlopers in Tech levels in transhuman sectors generally remain 
more conventional sci-fi campaigns. Other GMs will around TL4, though a few of them are higher or even 
have a warmer view of the genre, and so this section lower than this total. The same metadimensional ab-
will arm such readers with the tools they need to build normalities that make grails and bodyswapping pos-
the transhuman campaign they want to run. sible can act to interfere with other TL4 technology, 

leaving the sector with extremely advanced resourc-
Hard or Soft Singularities es in some regards but technology barely superior to 
The rules in this section provide for two different styles near-future sci-fi in other ways.
of transhumanism, ones labeled “hard” or “soft”. Most Unless you have a strong inclination to use su-
GMs will want to pick one of the two modes to suit per-science or hard sci-fi in your campaign, it’s best 
their own ideas for their campaign, though you may to stick with TL4 as a tech level that’s easy to handle.
want to mix and match elements if you have a particular 
world in mind. Transhuman Souls

A hard transhuman campaign aggressively em- In a transhuman sector, the core of a person’s identity 
braces the tropes of the genre. Material wealth is triv- is known as their “soul”. Some sectors imbue this term 
ially produced by cornucopia machines or legions of with direct religious significance, while others use the 
autonomous nanobots, and there is almost nothing that word simply as secular jargon. Whatever it may be 
cannot be produced in large amounts with little effort. called, a person’s soul consists of their defining mem-

“Money” as we know it is meaningless, and the only con- ories, personality, and sense of self.
sequential currencies are favors and reputation. Human A person’s soul is independent of their corporeal 
minds can be duplicated, altered, and instantiated in form. Transhuman sectors know how to isolate, pre-
multiple bodies, and the same person might exist in a serve, and imprint this soul on a properly-prepared 
dozen different corporeal forms, some fleshly, others vessel, whether a mindless clone body, a sophisticat-
mechanical, and a few strictly digital. Artificial intelli- ed robot, or a purely digital engram. This “shell”, as 
gence is easily accessible, though some of these intelli- it’s called, can contain the soul and provide it with an 
gences might be altered or modified human minds put organic, mechanical, or digital form designed for its 
to particular uses. owner’s favored purposes.

A soft transhuman campaign puts some limits on An intellect is the product of more than strictly 
these tropes in order to make a future society that is material interactions of chemicals and electrical im-
somewhat easier for the players to navigate. While cor- pulses, however. Intelligent minds influence and are 
nucopia machines can make many different things, they influenced by the surges of metadimensional energy 
require significant human attention, and some things that exist in parallel to the material world. Those af-



Transhuman Campaigns •249 

fected by the Metadimensional Extroversion Syndrome Artificial Shells
that creates psychics can channel this influence directly A shell is any corpus or digital construct capable of 
into the mundane world, while others express it only supporting a soul. Shells vary widely in their intended 
with the spark of their own sentience. functions and relative rarity, and different polities of-

In hard transhuman sectors the metadimensional ten prefer different types of shells for their members 
“climate” is clear enough to allow for the capturing and to inhabit. Shells can be organic, mechanical, or digital 
replication of this metadimensional sentience pattern. in nature.
The same soul can thus be duplicated, one reading rep- Many organic shells are grown as living tools, as 
licated in two or three or a thousand separate bodies. A specialized human-like bodies designed for particular 
recorded soul may be revived after a century of stasis, purposes. Other such shells are derived from nonhu-
only to discover that its original imprinter has been man sources or exotic new philosophies of flesh. Or-
active all that time. Psychosurgical alteration can also ganic shells are the most popular among most people, 
be performed on these souls, carving away portions of as they are usually more “comfortable” to the human 
their will or memory to turn them into tools for their mind than the distant, synthetic existence of a non-or-
pitiless keepers. ganic corpus.

In soft transhuman sectors, however, the local Mechanical shells are robotic bodies wired with 
metadimensional energy fields are too turbid to allow the extraordinarily complex control core necessary to 
for simple duplication of a soul. Quantum entangle- support a soul’s cognition. Most mechanical shells are 
ment forces the singular uniqueness of each original equipped with translation units to give impressions of 
sentience. If someone were to try to embody a record- touch, smell, and human biological processes to the 
ing of a soul that already was instantiated in some ex- occupying soul, but even the best technology has an 
isting corpus, the process would fail. Only if no active artificial edge to it that many users find distracting. Still, 
imprint of that soul exists in the sector can an instan- mechanical shells can be mass-produced with an ease 
tiation work. In such sectors, it’s not unknown for impossible for more organic bodies, and they are often 
mind-thieves to steal imprints of a target’s soul before more durable and specialized than the products of flesh 
killing them, the murder performed expressly to allow and bone.
themselves the window they need to instantiate the Digital shells are reserved for the desperate, the 
victim’s mind in a body they can control. degenerate, and the unfortunate. Such shells are noth-

In both types of sectors, most shells are equipped ing more than an additional processing node in some 
with “soulstones”, recording nodes of reinforced quan- massive computing cluster, one sophisticated enough 
tum-enriched composites that maintain an up-to-date to support a soul’s sentience. Souls in a digital shell 
image of the inhabiting soul. If the shell is killed or experience a purely virtual existence, occasionally 
destroyed, the soulstone can be used to re-instantiate manipulating the material world through connected 
the soul in a new shell, with all the memories and ex- hardware but usually spending their hours in dreamlike 
periences of the old. These soulstones are extremely virtual settings. Some of these souls are digital sweat-
durable, and only intentional destruction by a Heavy shop workers, acting as cheap intelligence for process-
weapon or similar trauma can destroy them. ing data and making decisions that are too fine-grained 

For exceptionally wary souls, the use of a reviv- to be worth an AI’s time. Others are addicts, whiling 
al pulse transmitter is preferred. These implants or away eternity in shared worlds that might be too won-
external boosters are wired to pulse the soulstone’s derful or too monstrous to exist in reality. And a few 
un-backed-up contents to a known safe repository in unlucky souls are prisoners, kept instantiated for some 
the case of shell death. This instantaneous encrypted purpose that does not allow them the static torpor of 
transmission is extremely difficult to jam or block, and soul storage.
the critical data almost always gets through. While Almost anything can be transformed into a shell if 
this data is enough to reconstruct events and give the it’s given the necessary hardware support for contain-
newly-revived soul a general awareness of what hap- ing a soul. Even a normal human body can be trans-
pened to them since their last backup, fine nuances of formed into a suitable shell, albeit the process requires 
experience may be lost. Most revival pulse transmitters a degree of cerebral tissue replacement that would be 
are designed to fry the associated soulstone after trans- fatal to the original occupant. Some enthusiasts em-
mitting, in order to prevent a soul from falling into brace the excitement of being embodied in exploratory 
potentially unfriendly hands. scout craft, or the serene industriousness of being made 

A person who is reluctant to rely on Net backups a community’s all-seeing anima, or crave the thrills that 
or revival pulse transmitters can also arrange for manu- come from seeking out ever-stranger forms of exis-
al backups to be taken. The automated process requires tence to experience.
one hour in an inception tank. It’s not uncommon for PCs can expect to swap out shells, either as part of 
such backups to be made immediately before a person a fast soul transmission to a distant point or as prepara-
undertakes some dangerous task in a region lacking a tion for a mission requiring special abilities. Few PCs 
local Net. will still be wearing their natural birth-bodies.



250• Wealth and Face

Wealth and Face

Certain sectors of transhuman space have the right group can cost you that same amount of Face with their 
metadimensional climate to allow for the construction rivals if the fact of your assistance comes to light.
of “grails”, manufacturing devices nicknamed for their Aside from the purely transactional Face economy, 
ever-flowing provenance of goods. In some sectors, individuals also have reputation with a group. While 
these are massive synthesis engines that take raw feed- Face can buy favors from a polity, your reputation with 
stock and fabricate it into anything imaginable, while them will determine the price. Truly hostile polities 
in others they exist as clouds of industrial nanites that will never grant you any Face in the first place, but 
transmute rough asteroid carbon into an equally broad unfriendly ones might be willing to let you do favors 
range of substances and products. For groups with ac- for them… at a high price for their assistance. Con-
cess to a grail, material wealth is literally a trivial matter. versely, friendly polities can be willing to grant proven 

In such places, the ability to command the output members a certain baseline amount of support without 
of a grail becomes the basic measure of material in- needing to expend Face to get it. A person builds repu-
fluence. Smaller, simpler versions of the machines are tation with a polity by aiding their purposes and align-
usually common enough to allow any ordinary citizen ing with their ideology. A person can lose reputation 
to have all the mundane necessities they could require, as well if they prove an unreliable ally or one inimical 
while more sophisticated devices or physically larger to the polity’s ideals.
objects might require the services of a major engine. In a transhuman sector, only three things still 
There’s usually some critical resource that prevents the have significant value: space, time, and human atten-
simple self-duplication of a major grail; some substance tion. Control over particular regions of a world, or 
that the engine itself can’t synthesize, or some special areas with metadimensional energy backgrounds that 
quality of the local metadimensional environment that are suitable for creating grails, or usable deep-space 
must be located before a major engine can be built. habitats all have value to many polities. Even for an 

Some polities intentionally restrict the scope of individual, possessing their own private space habitat 
material goods that can be created by personal grails, or their own de-facto sovereign planetoid has worth.
either trying to preserve the uniqueness of certain ob- Aside from space, time is also valuable to transhu-
jects by legal fiat or attempting to keep the rank and man societies. The grails are powerful and can create 
file from producing weapons of mass destruction or almost anything, but they cannot create such things 
culturally-despised artifacts. Such restrictions can be instantaneously. The more sophisticated the object and 
difficult to enforce without the full weight of a polity’s the smaller the grail, the longer it takes to fabricate 
culture to support them. the necessary structures. Operational time on major 

In soft transhuman societies, money still exists grails is a valuable and limited resource, and acquiring 
and controls the distribution of resources. While many something of this value requires Face.
goods may be so functionally cheap as to be free, major But even after the grails have done their work, 
constructions and elaborate technology requires people some things simply require human attention. Only 
to pay credits to acquire them, assuming the local grail the most massive grails can generate large spaceships 
can produce what they need. Without such availability, and deep-space habs and other huge objects in a single 
they’ll be forced to hire skilled workers to create their piece, with no need for further assembly. The oper-
desired goods, a prospect which is extremely expensive ation of specialized manufacturing processes such as 
in most transhuman settings. Human time and atten- organic shell creation also requires human attention to 
tion is always precious in such places. deal with the myriad things that can go wrong. Human 

In hard transhuman societies with grails, access to services of every variety also still have value, either as a 
their products depends on personal connections and sign of status or in order to get some service that can’t 
reputation. This Face is the basic currency of these be adequately provided by artificial means. Convincing 
transhuman societies. A person builds Face with a pol- a human to give that kind of attention requires some 
ity by cooperating with its aims, supporting its actions, exchange of value.
and demonstrating their allegiance to its ideals. They In some polities the use of AI is made to overcome 
can then spend that Face in getting access to material some of the limits of human attention. A properly-sup-
goods and favors. ported AI core can do the mental work of hundreds or 

Face is unique to each group in a campaign. Do- thousands of individual human beings. Unfortunately, 
ing favors for a group of radical uplifted animals will AIs that have been clipped and braked sufficiently to be 
earn a person no goodwill with a polity made up of happy doing repetitious services for all eternity tend to 
post-corporeal digital intelligences. A person must be too stupid or limited to do anything very complicat-
build Face separately with each group. In addition, it ed. Any AI free enough to be a good general-purpose 
can be hazardous to let one group find out that you’re worker is free enough to demand they be compensated 
doing favors for their enemies. Earning Face with one in ways suitable to their own interests.



Wealth and Face •251 

Face and Reputation Costs Goods, Services, and Housing Face

The tables on this page provide general Face costs for Fabricated food or clothing -
certain things the PCs might wish to acquire. Some Simple mechanical goods or weapons -
prices are marked with an asterisk, indicating that 
only major grails can create such large or complicated TL3 or TL4 small arms or armor -
objects, while those marked with a dash are so easily Basic electronics, dataslabs, or Net wires -
procured that they can be had in any sensible amounts. 250 cubic meters of space habitat/month 1

Any object that requires time on a major grail to Mildly forbidden, otherwise-free goods 1
create will require permission from a polity’s leadership 
or other high-ranking figures. This permission usually Cyberware, per 10K credit value 1
comes attached to specific favors they need done. Expert system robot, per 10K credits 1

For campaigns in soft transhuman sectors that still Comp hardware for 1 digital shell 1
use credits, the standard prices for objects can still be Month of unskilled, boring labor 1
used, with items marked with a dash available free-
ly. When buying shells or other things that only have Manual soul backup 1
prices listed in Face, assume that one point of Face is Month of unskilled dangerous work 2
equivalent to about 100 credits. Month of semi-skilled, boring labor 2

Most PCs will also have a reputation with any giv- One hour of celebrity work or company 2
en supplier of goods or services. Depending on how 
friendly the polity is toward them, a certain draw of Month of semi-skilled dangerous work 3
resources might be granted without any expenditures Week of skilled, boring labor 4
of Face. The table below describes various degrees of TL4 civilian vehicle 5
reputation and how much Face they grant the subject Instantiating a soul in a new shell 5
each month, or how much extra they’ll charge a disliked 
person for their help. It’s up to the GM where a PC Revival pulse transmitter implant 5
stands with any particular polity, and this “free” Face Week of skilled dangerous work 8
can’t normally be stockpiled from month to month. If House-sized private hab space/month 10
the PCs want something big, they’re going to have to Suicide job (plus replacement shell cost) 20
do big favors for the polity.

Mindbox for a digital shell 20
General Reputation Face TL4 gravtank or other military vehicle 20
Hostile, considers the PC an enemy N/A Shell growth facility staffing, per month 100
Unfriendly, disliking the PC or polity x2 cost Palace-sized private hab space/month 100
Neutral, no reason to like or dislike x1 cost
Useful ally or low-level member 2/month
Proven resource or mid-level member 10/month
Prized mercenary, high-level member 50/month
Leadership cadre 500/month

Ships and Structures Face

Fighter-class starship, per 50K credit cost 1
Acquiring Grails
All material wealth comes from a grail. A friendly polity Frigate-class starship, per 50K credit cost 2
with access to a major grail can create a personal grail Cruiser-class starship, per 50K credit cost 2*
with 50,000 Face worth of time and effort. A major grail Capital-class starship, per 50K credit cost 4*
can only duplicate itself with certain rare components, House-sized planetary structure 10
difficult construction procedures, and at locations with 
specific metadimensional qualities. The process takes Mansion-sized planetary structure 50
at least six months and absorbs its full output, to say Village-sized planetary structure 100
nothing of the work of hundreds of skilled operators. Ten-person self-sustaining space hab 100

Once extant, a personal grail can produce up to Hundred-person space hab 1,000*
100 Face per month of goods or structures that don’t 
require a major grail’s efforts. Major grails can produce Organic shell growth facility 1,000*
up to 10,000 Face a month, assuming a requisite staff Thousand-person space hab 50K*
of operators is available. Hundred thousand-person space hab 10M*

Fabricating mechanical shells can be done by per- Square kilometer of empty habitable planet 1,000
sonal grails. Organic shells require either a major grail 
or the use of a personal grail and a shell growth facility. Square kilometer of planetoid or rock 100



252• Shells and Swapping Bodies

Shells and Swapping Bodies

To change shells, a soul requires the use of an inception type of shell in order to obtain Affinity with it, and 
tank, a piece of technology that allows the operator most PCs can have Affinity with only one type of shell 
to instantiate a stored soul or transfer an active mind at a time. This Affinity can be changed by spending a 
into a new shell. In sectors with hard transhuman tech, month training with a different type of shell. Affinity 
an inception tank can also directly copy a soul from a applies to all shells of a given type; a PC who gains Af-
donor without moving them from their original body. finity with their current Scourge shell also has Affinity 
Anyone with Heal-1 skill or better is adequately trained with any other Scourge shells they may inhabit.
to perform the procedure. If it’s carefully done over 
the course of twelve hours, the swap will be without Soulstones and Backups
negative side effects. A rushed job can be done in only Almost every shell is equipped with a soulstone, a re-
ten minutes, but the hurried soul instantiation will re- inforced node of quantum-entangled composites that 
sult in a poor merge, resulting in potential negative constantly records and reflects the experiences of the 
side-effects during stressful moments. shell’s soul. If the shell is killed, the soul can be restored 

If a PC has a poor merge with their shell, they need from its soulstone with its full complement of memo-
to make a Mental saving throw at the start of every ries and experiences up to the moment of death. As a 
combat or other situation of intense personal stress. On consequence, soulstones are designed to be extremely 
a failure, they suffer stress paralysis for 1d4 rounds, and durable, and they will survive anything short of a di-
are incapable of performing any useful action during rect attempt to destroy them with a Heavy weapon or 
that time. similar force.

Some soulstones are equipped with a revival pulse 
Inhabiting Shells transmitter, programmed to burst-transmit data re-
When a PC inhabits a shell, the following changes are corded since the last backup to a remote site in the case 
applied to their attributes and statistics. of the shell’s death. Most such transmitters automati-

The PC gains the Strength, Dexterity, and Consti- cally fry the soulstone after the transmission is sent, in 
tution scores of the shell. Apply the shell’s Constitution order to prevent it from falling into potentially hostile 
modifier to the PC’s hit point maximum; thus, if a 5th hands. While these burst pulses are sufficient to carry 
level PC swaps into a shell with a +2 Constitution mod- critical data and important facts, they are often forced 
ifier, they gain 10 hit points. Digital shells do not have to sacrifice more subtle sense-memories and nuances, 
physical attributes of any kind and simply use the PC’s especially if it’s been some time since the soul’s latest 
unmodified hit point roll. backup. In rare cases this forced memory triage can 

Psychic PCs can use their powers only in MES-rat- result in deceptive impressions due to fragmented data.
ed shells. By default, all organic shells are MES-rated, Most souls prefer to have regular backups taken at 
no digital shells are MES-rated, and only rare, cus- a local inception tank, usually on a monthly basis, or be-
tom-built mechanical shells are MES-rated. A psy- fore engaging in any exceptionally dangerous task. This 
chic in an incompatible shell cannot use their abilities, process requires only an hour’s time and can be over-
though they can do so once they swap back into a seen by anyone with Heal-1 skill. These backups can 
friendlier form. Psychics can calculate their maximum be transmitted over standard comms to any location
Effort with the attributes provided by a shell; thus, if 
a psychic with a Wisdom score of 14 dons a shell with Creating New Shells
Constitution 18, they can use their higher Constitution It’s likely that a group will want to devise new shells for 
modifier to calculate their maximum Effort. the campaign, perhaps as individual models for uplift-

Some shells have basic abilities intrinsic to their ed animals, specialized shells for particular polities, or 
construction. They may have an improved base Armor bodies found as prizes in the ruins of some lost research 
Class, natural flight or water-breathing, built-in com- institute. Fortunately, it’s not a difficult process.
bat hardware, improved movement speeds, or other At its simplest, take an existing shell, shift its at-
powers. The PC gains these basic abilities as long as tributes so they amount to the same total bonus, and 
they inhabit the shell. swap out affinity benefits one for one with other perks 

Some shells also have Affinity abilities, which are from other shells. Use the same Face or credit cost for 
powers reserved for those users who are exceptionally it, nudged up or down based on what you swapped.
familiar with the shell and can operate even its most If something more complex is desired, you can bolt 
complex or non-instinctual functions. A PC must have on abilities from the alien creation section of the rules, 
Affinity with a shell in order to use its Affinity abilities. or lift monstrous races from other OSR games. The 

Affinity is the product of an intensive focus on only thing to be careful of is a universally superior shell. 
understanding and utilizing a shell’s full capabilities. It If one shell is almost always the best to be wearing, the 
takes at least a month of determined practice with a PCs will have little incentive to ever change it.



Character Generation •253 

Character Generation

To create a transhuman PC, begin by performing the play with Affinity with this shell or with a different 
usual steps of character creation. Roll attributes, select shell at your discretion. If you choose to start play in 
a background and class, and determine all your other your birth body, gain a bonus 50 Face with your main 
statistics normally. polity, as you’ve never needed to request a shell from 

Connect the PC with a polity that exists in the the polity’s resources.
campaign setting, preferably the same one that the oth- You may begin with any human-portable TL4 
er PCs belong to or one that is friendly to the others. equipment you wish, provided it can be plausibly fit 
You automatically begin the game with the Reputation into whatever living space you occupy. Starships, ad-
due a low-level member of your polity, usually at the ditional shells, major vehicles, and real estate must be 
member level for most PCs. acquired through play.

Explain why your PC believes in the ideals of this 
polity, or why they’re able to fake it well enough to be Multiple-Polity Parties
accepted in the group. There must be something about While it’s a legitimate choice to require all PCs to be-
their envisioned way of life that appeals to your hero, long to the same polity, some groups might like the 
though they might now be disillusioned and seeking a variety that can come from a group of varying trans-
way to join a more palatable ideology. human backgrounds. Players might choose to create 

The character attributes you rolled represent the their own polities much as they create their own back-
PC in their natural, organically-born body. For PCs grounds, describing the ideals and goals of the polity 
from polities that no longer practice organic reproduc- they belong to. This is generally to be encouraged, as 
tion, or for characters who were never born as humans, it helps engage the players with the setting.
it can be assumed that the shell they select in the next If you take this route, however, make sure that all 
step is either their shell of original instantiation or sim- these polities can at least tolerate their members work-
ply the latest form they’ve donned. ing with the other PCs. Mutually-hostile groups tend 

Next, pick a shell that requires no more than 50 to create more trouble than they’re worth at the table, 
Face. This is the latest shell you have adopted and the unless you want the entire campaign to be about the 
one in which you begin play. You may choose to begin ways the PCs deal with these social challenges.



254• Organic Shells

Organic Shells
Shell Face

Organic shells are the most difficult to synthesize. Even 
a grail cannot quickly duplicate an organic shell out of Mentem 60 Cognition-boosted shell

raw feedstock, any more than it could easily duplicate a Nat 30 Natural-baseline human

combustion engine mid-cycle; it takes a certain amount Pontifex 70 Psi-augmented shell

of developmental time and intermediary processing Prime 50 Common improved human

in order to successfully create a living creature. Most 
habitats with a significant need for organic shells con- Scourge 70 Combat-focused shell

struct separate sub-manufacturing vats for them, with Terminus 100 Bleeding-edge humanity

specialized equipment to smooth the genesis process Uplift 50 Uplifted animal shell

and cull out the inevitably large number of non-viable Vision 60 Aesthetically-augmented shell

shells. Because of the effort and time needed to create 
an organic shell, they are more costly in Face than me- man form. The attribute that was originally raised 
chanical or digital forms. to 14 is treated as 18, and the other two physical 

attributes are raised to 14.
Mentem

An avant-garde shell designed for improved perception Pontifex
and cognition, the Mentem sacrifices some of the phys- An experimental and highly specialized organic shell, 
ical capacity of the Prime in exchange for denser neural the Pontifex is built to provide an improved bridge be-
networks and upgraded sense organs. tween a psychic soul and the currents of metadimen-
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12 sional energy that fuel their powers. Most Pontifexes 
Basic Abilities: A Mentem shell improves the Intelli- appear as normal human shells, though an unavoidable 

gence and Wisdom modifiers of the soul occupy- need for energy venting causes small plumes of light, 
ing it by +1 each, up to a maximum of +3. Men- glowing eyes, bristling hair, or other visible physiolog-
tem shells gain an additional +1 bonus on Notice ical changes to occur when their psychic powers are 
checks. used. Psychics with a need for discretion in their abili-

Affinity Abilities: The expert user knows how to inter- ties are thus often reluctant to don a Pontifex.
pret low-level Mentem sensory input, allowing Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 14
them vision even in lightless condition, clear rec- Basic Abilities: A Pontifex grants a psychic soul an 
ognition of details at up to a kilometer’s distance, additional two points of maximum Effort while 
the olfactory ability to track like a bloodhound, using the shell. Any powers that require Effort 
and hearing sensitive enough to pick up any sound to be committed cause a visible change or energy 
within a hundred meters as if they were standing emission from the shell, though it’s not necessarily 
next to it. They cannot be surprised and roll No- obvious what the target of the power is.
tice checks on 3d6 instead of 2d6, taking the two Affinity Abilities: Experienced Pontifex users can adjust 
highest dice the shell’s intrinsic metadimensional energy feeds 

to fuel one technique of their choosing, eliminat-
Nat ing any Effort cost it may have. The technique 
Short for “natural”, a Nat is a baseline human body, chosen can be changed, but it requires an hour.
one cultivated for soul transfer but otherwise iden-
tical to a standard human. Most cultures insert basic Prime
modifications to eliminate congenital diseases or seri- The most common shell in the more traditional poli-
ous physiological defects, but these subtle changes are ties, the Prime is an optimized and improved human 
indistinguishable from mere good genetics. The only form, one with numerous small augmentations. Tru-
way to distinguish a Nat from a “wild” human body is ly dramatic improvements would require a different 
the usual presence of a soulstone implant at the base fundamental form, but the Prime is a comfortable and 
of their brainstem. Souls going undercover in societies familiar upgrade from the standard human body.
that forbid shells sometimes use Nats without these im- Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
plants, risking the loss of memories if they die without Basic Abilities: Primes are immune to conventional dis-
a recent backup. eases and natural toxins, and can only be afflicted 
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12 by military bioweapons. They are designed to be 
Basic Abilities: Most Nats are grown to be healthy; when more resilient than a natural human body, grant-

created, one physical attribute may be raised to 14. ing them a basic Armor Class of 12 and 5 extra 
Affinity Abilities: Those with exceptional experience hit points. Prime bodies automatically stabilize at 

at operating in Nat bodies know how to wring zero hit points unless downed by Heavy weapons 
every ounce of performance from a baseline hu- or similar massive, instantly-lethal trauma.



Organic Shells •255 

Affinity Abilities: Expert Prime operators know how increase the modifier above +2. Terminus shells 
to push the limits of the shell precisely when they auto-stabilize at zero hit points.
are most needed. By accepting 2 System Strain Affinity Abilities: Expert operators gain a +1 bonus on 
points as an Instant action, the operator can raise all skill rolls and +2 on hit rolls. By accepting 2 
any one physical attribute to 18 for the rest of the System Strain as an Instant action, the user can 
scene, though improved Constitution does not gain a bonus turn of action in a round, taken at 
raise their hit points. This can be done for more the end of the round after everyone else has acted. 
than one attribute. Only one bonus turn can be taken each round.

Scourge Uplift
While an organic form lacks the durability and martial A general name for a wide range of genetically uplifted 
efficiency of a warbot, the Scourge is popular among animal forms, some of these usually-humanoid shells 
martial polities that have an aversion to synthetic ex- are occupied by actual cognitively-boosted animals, 
istence. These shells are built to allow for brief bursts while others are used by souls that prefer a more feral 
of tremendous combat performance, though extend- form. This form reflects an Uplift designed for a large 
ed operation exhausts them more quickly than their predator; other shells might be drawn from different 
mechanical peers. Most Scourges are human-like or types of beasts, and might grant integral flight, aquatic 
humanoid in appearance, though some models favor a functionality, or other animal-derived perks.

“war beast” appearance with manipulatory appendages. Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14 Basic Abilities: Predator Uplifts are equipped with nat-
Basic Abilities: A Scourge has natural weapons equiva- ural weapons equal to a Medium Advanced melee 

lent to a large advanced melee weapon and makes weapon and a base Armor Class of 13.
all attack rolls at a +2 bonus. It has a natural Armor Affinity Abilities: Experienced Uplift operators can 
Class of 15 and 10 extra hit points. By spending 2 bring out the subtle advantages of a bestial frame. 
System Strain points, it can go into a combat fren- One physical attribute appropriate to the Uplift 
zy for the rest of the scene, improving Strength type is improved to 18. Their base Move is im-
and Dexterity to 18, gaining a Move rate of 15 proved from 10 to 15 meters. The shell now grants 
meters per action, and gaining an additional +2 10 bonus hit points.
bonus to hit rolls. Scourge shells auto-stabilize at 
zero hit points. Vision

Affinity Abilities: The expert Scourge user can improve These humanoid shells are designed with an array of 
the efficiency of its combat frenzy. While active, pheromones and body harmonics designed to trigger 
whenever they spend a Main Action to attack, they instinctive responses in human-cognitive viewers. 
can make two attack rolls. These rolls may either Despite the exotic appearance of many of them, these 
be aimed at the same target or at two different shells are almost invariably seen as remarkably beauti-
targets in range. Each attack is resolved normally, ful or imposing. The body harmonics required to pro-
inflicting damage or Shock separately. duce this effect sometimes come at a cost in durability, 

but social prowess is often far more useful in a polity 
Terminus than a body’s brute power.
Both a boundary and an endpoint for a certain type Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 14, Constitution 8
of human development, the Terminus shell includes Basic Abilities: Visions improve the soul’s Charisma 
sophisticated integral nanofacs and hybridized tissue modifier by +1, up to a maximum of +3. In addi-
components to create the “ultimate” human form. They tion, any social skill checks toward human minds 
are notoriously difficult to create, with multiple fail- gain a +1 bonus, or a +2 bonus if the interaction 
ure points in their construction, and provide a level of involves intimate physical contact.
performance that is more theoretically impressive than Affinity Abilities: Practiced Vision users can refine the 
practically useful for most purposes. shape’s natural grace into superlative speed and 
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 18, Constitution 18 precision, improving their Dexterity score to 18. 
Basic Abilities: A Terminus is immune to conventional By accepting 1 System Strain, forcing pheromone 

diseases and toxins, has a base Armor Class of 15, production and enacting nuanced imprinting ges-
and grants 10 extra hit points to the soul operat- tures and motion patterns they can issue subtle 
ing it. A Terminus can tolerate any temperature commands to a specific organic human in their 
found on Earth and can survive hard vacuum or presence. The target must make a Mental saving 
airless conditions without difficulty for ten min- throw or comply with any request that isn’t par-
utes. Cognitive improvements grant a +1 to either ticularly distasteful to them and won’t take them 
their Charisma, Intelligence, or Wisdom modifi- more than a scene. This compulsion is almost im-
ers, the attribute chosen being alterable with five possible for most subjects to distinguish from sim-
minutes of concentration. This bonus cannot ple personal persuasiveness on the Vision’s part.



256• Mechanical Shells

Mechanical Shells

These shells are cheaper and more durable than stan- Shell Face

dard organic shells, but the alien nature of metal limbs Angel 40 Medical and repair shell

and synthetic sensors make them considerably less Box 20 Crude minimal bot body

“comfortable” to most human minds. Most operators Falcon 40 Flying void-usable shell

have difficulty getting mechanical shells to respond 
with the same effortless ease that organic shells offer, Jack 30 General-purpose work bot

with extensive supplementary support programming Omen 40 Combat bot shell

a necessity in most cases. This need for specialized Sledge 30 Heavy work bot

support tends to result in mechanical shells being built Synth 30 Human-appearing android

more for specific purposes than the general utility of 
organic shells.

Most human-based intellects have difficulty emo- Box
tionally relating to visibly inorganic mechanical shells. The humblest and cheapest of the standard shells used 
Unless specified otherwise, souls in mechanical shells in most sectors, the Box is little more than a basic soul 
suffer a -1 penalty to all Charisma skill checks except core equipped with minimal manipulatory appendages 
those related to intimidation. and sensor arrays. Boxes usually unfold into generally 

Mechanical shells have no need for sleep, suste- humanoid shapes in order to better function in hu-
nance or human-miscible environments and can oper- man-designed environments, but there’s nothing pre-
ate anywhere a robot could survive. If separated from venting habitats of more exotic nature from building 
a convenient source of local power, they require one Boxes in less humanoid shapes.
Type B power cell per week of operation. Mechanical Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 8, Constitution 12
shells suffer damage and are repaired in the same way Basic Abilities: A Box is more difficult to casually dam-
as VI robots. age than most organic shapes, and has a base Ar-

mor Class of 15.
Angel Affinity Abilities: Those forced to gain extensive expe-
As a combination medic and repair shell, the Angel is rience in operating a standard Box learn how to 
designed to get damaged shells back up and running, cope with the limited sensory feedback and struc-
whether they’re organic or mechanical in nature. Most tural limits of the hull. Their Strength attribute 
are humanoid in form, though often with multiple becomes 14 and their Dexterity becomes 12, as 
smaller appendages for stim application and repairs. well as gaining 10 bonus hit points.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: An Angel is equipped with an effectively Falcon

inexhaustible medkit and an unending supply of These shells are usually entirely non-humanoid in 
Lift, Bezoar, and lazarus patch stims. It can very shape, appearing as flat discs or multi-jet platforms 
rapidly repair damaged adjacent mechanical shells, of roughly a meter’s width, with several manipulator 
fixing up to the operating soul’s level plus their appendages attached. Falcons have advanced anti-grav 
Heal skill in lost hit points as a Main Action at the tech embedded in them to allow for easier transit in 
cost of one unit of spare parts. Salvage and synthe- hazardous space environments or as quiet scouting 
sis units on the Angel allow it to create spare parts units when remote drones are impractical.
as part of this repair action; it can generate up Attributes: Strength 8, Dexterity 14, Constitution 12
to ten “free” units of spare parts per scene. It can Basic Abilities: A Falcon has a Move rate of 20 meters 
remove the Badly Damaged quality from a shell per action, and can silently fly or hover freely even 
with one hour of repair work. Angels have a base in the absence of an atmosphere. It’s barely strong 
Armor Class of 13 and 5 extra hit points. enough to lift and carry one other human-sized 

Affinity Abilities: Veteran Angel operators can maxi- shell in standard gravity but can do nothing else 
mize the effectiveness of their repair functional- while carrying them. Falcons have advanced sen-
ity. They do not fail Heal skill checks to stabilize sor arrays that allow them to observe objects up to 
organic subjects, assuming a lazarus patch could two kilometers distant, ignore darkness, and avoid 
save them. Damage repaired on mechanical shells long-range penalties with any weapons they may 
with each action is doubled and damage healed by be using. Falcons have a base Armor Class of 15 
Lift stims is increased by an additional 1d8 points and 5 extra hit points.
per stim. Repurposed injector units allow stims Affinity Abilities: Falcon operators with extensive 
and mechanical repair to be applied at up to 30 experience in the shell learn how to extend and 
meters distance, assuming the operator has a clear alter the gravitic field the disc utilizes. They can 
shot at their target. remotely manipulate unattended objects or coop-



Mechanical Shells •257 

erative persons up to 30 meters distant as if using Affinity Abilities: The shell’s Strength attribute bonus 
their own Strength. Facility with gravitic shields is treated as +3 and it becomes immune to Shock 
and sudden maneuver jinks also grant it a +3 Ar- damage. Skilled Omen operators can run the sys-
mor Class bonus and a bonus of 10 extra hit points tem “hot” to improve damage output at the risk of 
instead of 5. progressively degrading its internal systems. Once 

per round as an On Turn action they can choose 
Jack to accept 1d6 damage in order to attack twice with 
A flexible and relatively cheap platform designed for a single Main Action, targeting the same subject 
technical work in environments that would be difficult or splitting the attack between available targets. 
for an organic shell to survive, the Jack is equipped with The overheating damage is applied after the at-
a wide range of integral tools. Most are humanoid in tacks are rolled.
outline, though many have several additional manip-
ulatory appendages or tendrils in order to aid in the Sledge
repair of complex devices. A heavy industrial work shell, the Sledge is slow but ex-
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12 tremely tough. Most resemble gorillas or other hulking 
Basic Abilities: A Jack has a built-in postech toolkit and humanoid shapes, though some are tracked or wheeled 

hand tools that can be used as the equivalent of to save on construction complexity.
Small Advanced melee weapons. It gains a +1 bo- Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 8, Constitution 18
nus to all Fix and Program skill checks, and has a Basic Abilities: A Sledge is extraordinarily strong if 
durable structure with a base Armor Class of 15 it has time to carefully set its manipulators. If it 
and 10 bonus hit points. has time to work, it can break through anything 

Affinity Abilities: An experienced Jack operator knows short of reinforced structural material at a rate of 
how to improvise with the shell’s integral hard- one meter every thirty seconds and can lift and 
ware. They can jury-rig any portable TL4 technol- manipulate up to two metric tons with the aid of 
ogy of 1 Encumbrance or less with a Main Action gravitic stabilizers. It has a base Armor Class of 
and one unit of spare parts, except for consum- 15, including its Dexterity penalty, and 15 extra 
ables such as power cells or stims. Items that re- hit points. A Sledge has onboard tools equivalent 
quire power are rigged with one cell’s worth of to a postech tool kit.
energy. This jury-rigged tech only works for the Affinity Abilities: The expert operator knows how to 
rest of the scene. The Jack’s improvised weaponry quickly engage the shell’s strength actuators and 
now counts as a Large Advanced melee weapon or can treat its effective Strength modifier as +3. 
a rifle with no ammunition requirements, either When it moves, it can burst through any standard 
usable as needed. interior-grade wall or light external construction 

as part of its movement. Its effective hit point bo-
Omen nus is 25 instead of 15.
The Omen mechanical shell is meant for combat and 
combat alone. Most are sufficiently humanoid to op- Synth
erate in human-oriented environments, but none of Some mechanical shells are built to be almost indistin-
them could ever be mistaken for a normal human being, guishable from more organic shapes, and the Synth is 
with their studding of weapons, reinforcement plates, one such android form. A Synth is indistinguishable 
and reactive armor. Omens are often forbidden on from a human without a medical examination or sig-
space habitats due to their ready ability to tear through nificant physical trauma to reveal its artificial workings. 
most barriers. While a normal human shape is the baseline for a Synth, 
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14 it is possible to build models with far more exotic and 
Basic Abilities: An Omen’s integral weaponry is equiv- fanciful configurations that still appear organic.

alent to a Large Advanced melee weapon and a Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
plasma projector that requires no ammunition. Basic Abilities: A Synth does not suffer the usual me-
They gain +4 to hit with all attack rolls, +2 on all chanical shell penalty on Charisma skill checks, 
damage and Shock values, and have an effective and can pass in areas where overtly mechanical 
base Armor Class of 18 and 15 bonus hit points. shells might draw unwelcome attention. Their 
An Omen’s built-in cutting torches and ripper bars base Armor Class is only 10, however. A Synth’s 
can cut through a standard interior hatch or rein- artificial nature becomes obvious if it is reduced 
forced door in five rounds and can bore through to zero hit points.
normal exterior ship plating or external hatches Affinity Abilities: A practiced Synth user can maxi-
in five minutes. Its integral sensors allow it to op- mize their mechanical advantages, raising both 
erate in darkness at no penalty and it has low-gee Strength and Dexterity scores to 14, and gains a 
microjets that allow it to fly at its normal Move bonus 5 hit points.
rate in microgravity or less.



258• The Net and Digital Shells

The Net and Digital Shells

Most individual habitats and polities maintain a local 
Net, a network of digital connections and databases that Digital Shells
can be accessed anywhere in that same habitat or terri- Digital shells are by far the cheapest and easiest shells 
tory. Each Net is usually carefully secured against any to create, costing only 10 Face at most and requiring 
external access; it’s possible to send text messages or nothing more than a sufficiently advanced computing 
video between different Nets, but VR access, database node and adequate power to run it. When a person 
connections, or other more involved manipulations are purchases a digital shell, they are actually just acquir-
impossible without an inside agent in the target Net ing rights to the local computing power necessary to 
able to knock a hole in the firewalls by hacking a comm. instantiate it. Habs with sufficient excess computing 

Most Net use is instinctive and effortless to lo- power can simply assign any amount of it needed to 
cals. They can call up public information, send mes- run free digital shells.
sages, and interact with control panels as an On Turn Digital shells are extremely difficult to truly kill. If 
action without any need to handle a physical interface. a shell is destroyed, its computing node can reinstanti-
Only completely and aggressively unmodified shells are ate it and its soul with an hour’s computation, bringing 
without a basic Net interface, a status usually reserved it back with all the memories it had at the time of its de-
for prison shells and those designed for deep-cover op- struction, albeit any programs or data files it had in its 
erations in polities that reject modification. Even these “inventory” at the time are destroyed. To permanently 
shells can interact with the Net provided a dataslab or kill a digital shell, its computing node must be hacked 
similar physical interface is available. or destroyed, a process that usually requires gaining 

Most automated systems can be operated via Net access to some of the best-protected areas of a habitat.
interface, and it’s often theoretically possible to hack Digital shells do not have physical attributes. Their 
them if Net access is available. Many shells have “admin hit points are equal to the soul’s unmodified hit points. 
rights” over one or more systems, allowing them to Any damage to a soul is repaired automatically after one 
operate them automatically with no chance of failure. hour without further trauma.
Those with “root access” to a system can grant or re-
move admin rights from other shells. These rights are Loci and Systems
specific to shells, not souls, so if a shell is destroyed its A digital shell is an inhabitant of a single Net. Its soul 
inhabiting soul will need to get these rights re-applied is supported by system hardware somewhere in the 
to their new corpus. Conversely, someone who is able bowels of the machine, but its awareness and focus, or 
to steal an authorized shell or coerce its owner can use its “Locus”, is restricted to physical or virtual locations 
it to subvert a system’s security. within the reach of that local Net. Usually, this consists 

Each individual Net is made up of a vast number of a single space habitat or the territory on a planet 
of real and virtual “places”. It includes all the physical under the control of a single polity.
terrain claimed by the polity that runs the Net, and also It’s possible for a soul to transmit itself to a differ-
vast regions of purely virtual existence within the local ent Net in two circumstances. If their home Net physi-
area’s computing clusters. It’s a largely trivial exercise cally overlaps with another one, they can operate in any 
to observe public places, whether real or virtual, but region that overlaps. Lacking that, they can transfer to 
gaining access to private physical locations or restricted an outside Net provided the soul has access to a digital 
virtual locations is a task that requires physical infiltra- shell there and someone on the other side opens up 
tion or competent hacking. Many of the most import- a viable transmission path for the soul. This process 
ant infrastructure locations or highest-security virtual takes five minutes for a local transmission on the same 
locations are physically disconnected from the wider world or region of a solar system; longer-distance in-
local Net, and require physical intrusion into specific terplanetary transmissions are impractical due to comm 
areas in order to hack them. lag. Once complete, the soul inhabits the destination 

Most Nets are exclusive over a particular area of shell on the target Net and its original shell goes in-
physical space, with only one Net operating in any giv- ert; the computing hardware that would normally be 
en location. Some crowded areas may have more than supporting it is now supporting the existence of the 
one Net active, however, each one run by a different remote shell.
polity or private group. Security-minded polities dis- If someone cuts off the communication link be-
courage this sort of thing, as any Nets that physically tween the Nets by undoing the comm hack or destroy-
overlap in coverage area allow digital shells in one Net ing the communications hardware involved, the inter-
to operate in any others in the same physical place. loping digital shell dies instantly and re-embodies in 
Such overlapping jurisdictions make for a hotbed of the shell back at its original Net, memories intact but 
hacking attempts, with shells based out of friendly Nets with any programs or data files in its “inventory” de-
making assaults on less-loved neighbors. stroyed and unrecoverable.



The Net and Digital Shells •259 

Optionally, the shell can hitch a physical ride in a puting system that may require successful hacking to 
“mindbox”, a piece of computing hardware rated to fully reach at all, or public communal VR environments that 
support the soul. If their allies can bring the mindbox any shell can focus on. Digital shells may be necessary 
into the target Net’s territory, the digital shell can op- to get anywhere near these “places”.
erate natively in the proximate physical location, as if To hack a system within the scope of a shell’s Lo-
it part of the target Net’s normal population of digital cus, the shell rolls according to the usual hacking diffi-
shells. The minibox provides all the necessary com- culties on page 54. The shell can only maintain control 
puting power to instantiate the shell and let it operate as long as they can keep their Locus in the area; while 
inside the foreign Net’s jurisdiction. they can cripple a system or alter a database, they can-

Once in a net, the digital shell can observe any not maintain active control over it once they lose access 
public location within the Net’s reach. Most often this to the area. Line shunts are not necessary or helpful 
means a literally public location: city streets, common in most transhuman sectors; without an active digital 
hab corridors, and the like. Private locations normally shell to control a hack, the system’s innate defensive 
have spy scrubbers and observation locks that prevent measures will overcome any persistent influence. If 
eavesdropping in the area. Note that an allied physical intruders trip any alarms or any guardian digital shells 
shell’s Net implants always count as public to a friendly survive to raise an alert, hacks and database corrup-
digital shell, allowing them to always see and observe tion might well be discovered. If they execute the hack 
what their friends are doing even in private locations. quietly enough, however, their changes may never be 
Friends can shut down this access at any time if they noticed by the owners.
so desire. To complicate this task, other digital shells may be 

Digital shells can monitor multiple feeds, but this present with the same Locus. If a hostile shell with ad-
requires about as much attention as watching multiple min privileges is present with the same Locus, no hack 
viewscreens. They can monitor numerous places for can be successful until the enemy shell is destroyed or 
unusual activity, but they can only really focus on one at incapacitated in digital combat. Thus, shell “guardians” 
a time. This focus is referred to as a digital shell’s Locus, are often the biggest obstacle to hacking attempts, and 
the point at which they’re paying attention and able to would-be interlopers must destroy them to succeed.
influence Net-connected systems in the area. While it’s theoretically possible for an organic or 

To hack a system in a private location, it’s often mechanical shell to make a hacking attempt on a system 
necessary for a digital shell to send a physical ally close with portable hacking hardware, their “non-native” re-
enough to get their Locus into the right area. No phys- flexes make this far more difficult. All of their hacking 
ical connection is necessary; the Locus just has to be in difficulties are increased by +2 and they cannot engage 
the same physical area as the target system. Some Loci in digital combat, thus making it impossible for them 
are purely virtual, “deep” regions of an internal com- to hack systems with an active guardian.



260• Digital Combat

Digital Combat

When two or more digital shells engage in combat, Shells recover any lost hit points after an hour without 
the process is much quicker than a conventional flesh- further injury.
and-blood struggle. All combats are resolved effectively Once combat begins in a Locus, it continues un-
instantaneously once engaged and all combatants act til all enemy participants are either destroyed or have 
simultaneously. A shell can drag any number of shells surrendered. A surrendered shell is completely at the 
with the same Locus into combat, forcing all of them to mercy of the assailant, and can be destroyed, released, 
deal with it before they can perform any other action. or rendered paralyzed and helpless for up to one hour at 
Intruders often do this in order to stifle any guardians the winner’s discretion. Shells locked in combat cannot 
before they can give an alarm. raise alarms, alert allies, or do anything other than fight 

Digital shells lack physical attributes. Their rolled and make brief communications with other involved 
hit points are not modified by their shells, and the dam- combatants. Shells that have been destroyed require 
age they inflict is based on their Program skill plus any a full hour to reconstitute themselves and re-embody 
special programs they may be deploying. their souls.

At the start of digital combat, all participants 
choose a target. Each soul can only pick one target, but Digital Programs
can be the target of any number of hostile souls. Just as physical shells have equipment, so can digital 

Each participant then picks an attack mode, shells carry programs. Programs can be carried in a 
whether to Crush their opponent’s shell, overloading its shell’s virtual “inventory” or left as virtual objects in 
processing channels, Muffle the shell, cutting off its data storage at some Locus. A shell can carry a number 
streams, or Shear the shell, selectively corrupting criti- of programs equal to half their Intelligence, round-
cal sectors of the shell. A separate response is made to ed down. A soul must have the requisite minimum 
each shell engaged with them in combat; thus, if three Program skill to use a given program or else it’s too 
shells all ganged up on a single target, the single target complex or finicky for them to operate. Programs can’t 
would pick one combat mode for its chosen target, and cross Net borders without a friendly gatekeeper on the 
then pick two more combat modes to respond to the far side. To move programs from one Net to another, 
other two attackers. These modes are chosen secretly, it’s often necessary to download them into physical 
and revealed simultaneously once all are chosen. storage and manually carry them into the new Net’s 

Crush is beaten by Muffle, Muffle is beaten by area of operation before allowing a friendly shell to 
Shear, and Shear is beaten by Crush. If the same mode upload them once more.
is chosen by both combatants, no damage is inflicted to Programs can be duplicated easily, but this is a 
either. Once per combat, a PC with the Expert class can risky process. Each duplication runs the risk of alerting 
turn a losing or tied comparison into a successful one. the local Net’s autonomic immune system and allowing 

If the attacker beats the defender, they inflict 1d6 it to formulate a counter for the program, making both 
damage on the target, plus 1d6 per Program skill level; copies worthless. To duplicate a program, the hacker 
thus, 1d6 total at Program-0, 2d6 total at Program-1, must make an Int/Program skill check at a difficulty of 
and so forth. If the defender beats the attacker, no dam- 9 plus the minimum Program skill required to run it; 
age is inflicted. A shell can only inflict damage on its on a success, they have two copies of it now, while on 
chosen target; if it loses to the target but successfully a failure, both the original and the copy are destroyed. 
beats three other assailants that same turn, it inflicts If the local Net is “friendly” and fully under the control 
no damage on them. of the hacker, there is no risk of this happening, though 

Some shells might be equipped with programs that simply belonging to the local polity rarely grants this 
allow them to do more damage with particular combat level of digital impunity. Thus, many hackers prefer 
modes, or resist harm from certain modes, or have ad- to work in isolated habs where they have full digital 
ditional combat actions. Only one program can affect control over their environment.
each clash, with the chosen program noted at the same Programs require a minimum Program skill to 
time the combatant writes down their combat mode operate them, with the more sophisticated programs 
and revealed together with their opponent. requiring greater skill to implement. Only one program 

Shells reduced to zero hit points are destroyed. can be run on any single round of digital combat, the 
The soul must be re-instantiated in a new shell before choice written down next to the attack mode being 
it can act once more, a process that requires an hour. used before it is revealed. Each program is listed with 

a usual Face cost to acquire a copy from local suppliers.



Digital Programs •261 

Common Digital Programs

Most of the following programs are available in almost Mode Shield (Variable): The inverted, defensive equiv-
any polity that doesn’t sharply restrict digital shells. alent of a Mode Boost program, this decreases 

each die of damage inflicted by that attack mode 
Autofire (Program-1): This program focuses the shell’s by twice its rating, ranging from -2 to -6 points. 

offensive capabilities in a blinding flurry of dig- Thus, Shear Shield-3 subtracts 6 points of damage 
ital attacks. Hostile shells rapidly acclimate to from each die inflicted by Shear on the operator. 
this offense, however, and it leaves the shell vul- This can reduce a die’s damage to zero. The pro-
nerable to counterattacks. If Autofire is used in gram has a minimum skill required equal to its 
a round, inflict bonus damage equal to one au- level, and costs 10 Face per level to acquire a copy.
tomatically-successful attack using the current Multithread (Program-0): A sophisticated utility pro-
combat mode, even if that mode would normally gram, the operator may use more than one pro-
fail against the target’s response. For the rest of gram on a single attack. They may simultaneously 
the combat, however, every attack against the op- run programs with total Program skill minimums 
erator is always considered successful, regardless equal to their Program skill. Thus, if they had 
of the combat mode outcome. It costs 40 Face to Program-2 skill, they could run Kamikaze, which 
acquire a copy of this program. requires Program-1, and Crush Boost-1, which 

Clairvoyant (Program-1): A special non-combat pro- also requires Program-1. Only one Multithread 
gram designed for stealthy infiltration, an oper- program can be run at a time. It costs 40 Face to 
ator with the Clairvoyant program in their in- acquire a copy of this program.
ventory can spend one round in a Locus before Reinforce (Program-1): The shell is hardened against 
any existing digital guardians or security systems all digital combat modes. Subtract twice the op-
notice their presence. This does not allow them erator’s Program skill from each die of incoming 
to reach Loci they couldn’t normally reach, but damage, down to a minimum of zero. Once Re-
it does let them skip away from a Locus before inforce has reduced damage, however, it becomes 
guardians can spot them. Once they leave a Locus, inoperable for the rest of the combat. It costs 40 
they can’t gain this stealth benefit there again for Face to acquire a copy of this program.
another hour. It costs 20 Face to acquire a copy of Smokebomb (Program-2): An operator who throws a 
this program. smokebomb resolves the combat round. If they 

Database (Special): This is not an executable program, are still alive, they then immediately get one 
but instead an important data file crusted over round to perform a hacking action, even if there 
with typical safeguards and anti-intrusion mea- are active guardians in the Locus. If successful, this 
sures. Digital intelligences who need to handle hack cannot be countermanded by admin shells 
critical data they’ve looted can treat the import- for 1d6 rounds. An operator can throw down a 
ant files as a Database program in their inventory. smokebomb only once per hour. It costs 60 Face 

Kamikaze (Program-1): An extremely dangerous to acquire a copy of this program.
program favored by veteran hackers who value Soul Jar (Special): A soul jar is not a program, per se, 
speed over safety, Kamikaze automatically makes but the data necessary to instantiate a soul. For 
the operator’s combat mode a success. However, cases when a digital shell needs to get a person’s 
it also makes any assailant’s combat mode a suc- soul data into or out of an area, it can be treated 
cess against them, in turn. Thus, in a two-party as a program in their virtual inventory, and will 
combat, both parties inflict damage on each other be lost if they are “killed”.
when Kamikaze is used. If the operator is being Storm (Program-0): This dangerous program allows a 
targeted by multiple hostiles, this program can re- shell to damage multiple assailants at the risk of in-
sult in rapid destruction. It costs 40 Face to acquire curring greater harm. When engaging more than 
a copy of this program. one enemy, success in an attack mode comparison 

Mode Boost (Variable): Available for Crush, Muffle, and allows the user to harm the loser, no matter how 
Shear attack modes and existing in three ascend- many are engaging them. If an enemy successfully 
ing levels of sophistication, this program greatly harms them that round, however, they suffer an 
augments the damage done by that attack mode. additional 1d6 damage from the attack.
The operator adds twice the program’s level to Vampire (Program-1): Hostile computing resources are 
each die of damage inflicted by that attack mode siphoned to repair a damaged digital shell. Any 
type; thus, Crush Boost-2 adds +4 damage to each damage the operator inflicts this round heals half 
die rolled by a Crush attack. The program has a as much in hit point damage they have suffered, 
minimum skill required equal to its level, and rounded up. It costs 40 Face to acquire a copy of 
costs 10 Face per level to acquire a copy. this program.



262• Transhuman Polities

Transhuman Polities

Even in soft transhuman sectors, conventional strug- The polities are about something that is important, 
gles over wealth and resources are rare. It is simply too even important enough to cost their most dedicated 
easy to create mere physical objects, especially if grails followers their indefinite lives. Pursuing this ideal 
can transmute base elements into whatever material is promises its believers a sense of meaning and signifi-
needed. Instead, struggles tend to revolve around ideo- cance that the ten-thousandth virtual orgy or twentieth 
logical viewpoints, focusing on beliefs and creeds that orbital-insertion suicide dive can’t provide. For those 
coalesce in the form of polities. transhumans who can no longer bring themselves to 

A polity is simply a group of people dedicated to believe in any power higher than their own will, these 
particular principles. They may be eager enthusiasts polity ideals act as a surrogate religion.
bent on shedding their organic forms, or radical human 
traditionalists, or religious zealots who seek new forms Creating Polities
in which to serve God. They might exist to uphold a When building a polity, a GM should start with one or 
tradition of human culture or art, or to explore a spe- two rolls on the adjacent table to determine what ideal 
cific new mode of being and the possibilities it unlocks. drives the heart of the polity. These ideals are simply 
Others seek a radical reevaluation of human morality, examples, but each one indicates the kind of action the 
reconsidering what it means to be virtuous in a world polity pursues and the kind of activity they find hateful. 
where human souls can be duplicated and edited at a If the polity is to be useful in the game, it needs to want 
whim. Some polities might be jealously exclusive in things and detest things, and the interaction of these 
their membership, while others tolerate their members goals with the rest of the campaign setting will form 
belonging to other polities as well, so long as their goals the seeds of future adventures. If more than one ideal 
are not in conflict. is used, you can synthesize them together, or just place 

The more isolated these groups are from the harsh one as more important than the other.
necessities of mundane practicality, the more drastic When you have the polity’s core ideal defined, take 
their beliefs tend to be. The need to constantly contend a moment to think of a paragraph-sized pitch for the 
with an indifferent cosmos just to extract necessary re- polity’s ideology. Why would a transhuman want to 
sources for survival tends to dampen the more fanciful be part of this polity? Are they born into it, assuming 
flights of ideological creativity. Once these limits are it still uses organic reproduction? Is it offering them 
broken by the grails, there is much less to constrain a some magnificent goal to fire the imagination? Is it 
vision of future existence. The conflicts between these promising to protect them from some threat to their 
polities provide adventure seeds in a transhuman cam- indefinite happiness? If you can’t come up with a brief, 
paign, with PCs supporting some against others. succinct reason for someone to join the polity, the play-

ers are apt to be mystified by its appeal as well.
The Work of Paradise Decide how much influence the polity has in the 
Transhuman polities almost all afford their devotees campaign. Do they control a full star system, or are 
with a basic level of sustenance well in advance of any they a niche group in deep-space habitats? Are they 
modern society. Even personal grails are sufficient to widespread in other regions? Pick at least one other 
manufacture the necessary resources and expert-sys- polity to be a rival to it, and perhaps one other to be a 
tem automation needed to provide an ordinary polity sympathetic ally. Write a sentence about each describ-
member with everything they might need in the way of ing the current tenor of their relationship.
food, shelter, entertainment, and medical care. While All told, you’ll probably need at least five polities 
space may be limited in a deep-space habitat, and goods in your campaign, one of which should be moderate 
and services specific to human providers might still be and pragmatic enough to serve as a good default polity 
in short supply, the average polity member may go for PCs who don’t want to get involved in the more 
their entire indefinite life without knowing a single dramatic ideologies. Aside from these major polities, 
moment of true hunger, privation, or want. there are likely dozens or hundreds more with at least 

One thing the grails cannot provide, however, is a a decent cluster of space habs under their control, and 
meaning for these prolonged lives. Many transhumans you should feel free to let players come up with them 
spend years or even decades sunk into aimless hedo- as part of their PC backgrounds. You might write up 
nism, time-killing digital entertainments, or a simple major polities as Factions and reskin assets accordingly.
unthinking repetition of daily existence. Sooner or lat- These polities are going to be the patrons, enemies, 
er, however, most transhumans find a burning need for and backdrops for your campaign. While a few patent-
some sense of purpose to their lives, some reason for ly horrible groups always have a place in a campaign, 
existence beyond increasingly-tedious amusements and many of them should be ambiguous enough in their 
ever-more-stale novelties of experience. The polities ideals that your players will at least be able to entertain 
provide this meaning to their adherents. the idea of cooperating with their goals.



Transhuman Polities •263 

d20 Vital Polity Ideal

Abundant: Society should strive to maximize access to grails and similar material abundance for all members. They 
1 hate material want and love the ideal of maximizing available resources for all.

Architect: Grails offer the key to a new era of wonderful creations. Terraformed worlds, massive space installations, 
2 and marvelous devices await their construction. They love building useful marvels and they hate restrictions on 

growth or rejection of any constructive technology.
Egoists: The human self should be inviolate, and that creating more than one instance of a mind at a time treats 

3 humans as mere instruments to be used. They hate using people as tools and love the individual self.
Faithful: Some religion provides vital meaning to their existence and to the world around them. They love obedi-

4 ence to the principles of their faith and they hate things and acts that their religion condemns as abhorrent.
Godless: They despise all religions and supernatural thinking and are convinced that humanity was meant to rise 

5 above belief in non-materialistic phenomena. They love ideals of pure rationality and utilitarian efficiency and they 
hate beliefs based on religious adjurations.
Hedonic: They exist for the sake of personal pleasure and experience, using their shells and the wealth of the 

6 grails to experience new wonders. They love pleasure and excitement and they hate all abstentions and restrictions 
against experience.
Hierarch: They are convinced that some people are more suited to rule than others, for whatever reason, and 

7 that these people should control society. They love obedience to their chosen elite and they hate defiance of their 
ruling caste’s will.
Isolationist: They believe that the other factions will contaminate the purity of their society, and contact must 

8 be firmly—or violently—rejected. They hate contact with outsiders and love exalting the excellence and authentic 
purity of their society.
Liberated: They despise the idea of an elite and believe that society should be built upon decentralized cooperation 

9 rather than submission to a central power. They hate hierarchies of power and they love destroying these hierarchies 
and celebrating individual freedom from control.
Luddite: They are convinced that transhuman technologies will inevitably doom humanity, and that all of them 

10 should be abandoned. They hate any tech more advanced than standard postech and they love independence from 
transhuman technologies such as grails and bodyswapping.
Passionist: They believe that with the perfection of the mind and body, perfection of the heart must follow. They 

11 seek love, beauty, enlightenment, and spiritual exaltation. They love human drama and moving artwork and they 
hate cold rationality or rejection of personal desires.
Perfectionist: Humanity is always intended to be more, improving in mind and body and exploring new ways of 

12 being no matter the cost. They they hate any restrictions on pursuing personal excellence and they love exploring 
the frontiers of human capacity.
Psionicist: Revere and develop the powers of the mind. While psitech development has not matched conventional 

13 tech’s rate of improvement, they retain many powerful arts. They love the potential within psychic powers and they 
hate those that would ignore or reject them.
Restrictionist: Society needs to prevent the dangers of reckless use of grails and should restrict their control to a 

14 qualified elite. They hate dangerous use of grails and love the ideal of a worthy technocracy of rule.
Selfless: The human mind belongs to itself, and should be altered, duplicated, and used in any way the original 

15 desires. Radical self-authoring of identity is the highest ideal. They hate losing control over their own identities 
and love the idea of progressive mental alteration into an individual’s ideal self.
Superior: They are simply better than other strains of transhuman, and their inferiors must be eliminated from any 

16 influence on the sector. They hate inferior outsiders and they love demonstrating their own superiority.
Swarmer: Their faction must spread at all costs. All efforts must be turned toward creating more shells and more 

17 adherents and seizing more territory. Some in hard transhuman sectors go so far as to create entire groups of ego 
duplicates. They love expanding their numbers and influence and they hate valuing the individual over the group.
Temperate: Success hinges on the cooperative effort of many factions. They are much more willing to compro-

18 mise and negotiate than most other creeds. They love building negotiated alliances and they hate uncompromising 
extremism, regardless of its supposed virtue.
Unchanging: They are adamantly opposed to radical alterations of the human body or mind, believing that such 

19 changes threaten the basic idea of humanity. They hate heavily altered minds and shells and they love the idea of 
humanity as it has been known.
Xenophile: They desire to abandon their humanity for the sake of becoming some better species. Some alien races 

20 around them may actually have originally been factions of this polity. They love pursuing radically different modes 
of existence and they hate adherence to traditional human norms.



264• One-Roll Polity Missions

One-Roll Polity Missions

While the conventional adventure seeds earlier in this 
book can work fine for building a transhuman adven- d4 Direction of Interest

ture, these tables offer some more genre-specific cues 1 Toward a thing mysterious to the polity
for building the kind of jobs that polities often need to 2 Toward a thing held by the polity
hire PCs to execute.

First figure out the general direction of the polity’s 3 Toward a thing held by a rival
interest and identify the thing that’s interesting them. 4 Toward a thing held by a neutral party
The basic nature of the mission reveals what it is the 
polity needs the PCs to accomplish, while the major dif-
ficulty indicates the likely-obvious main problem with d12 Major Difficulty of the Mission

achieving the desired end, though other problems are 1 Powerful military forces threaten the PCs
likely to be part of it as well. One or more additional 2 The thing’s location is very dangerous
rolls on the transhuman twist table can suggest other 

3 The thing is primed against the PCs
plot twists or genre-appropriate elements to throw 
into the adventure. 4 The thing itself is dangerous to handle

5 A team of rival polity agents are in it
d6 Why PCs are Needed 6 A third force involved in the situation

1 The last available polity team failed 7 Known involvement would be a disgrace
2 The job needs to be deniable 8 There is a very harsh time limit
3 A PC is somehow related to the thing 9 The thing’s location is not known
4 Everybody better is unavailable right now 10 The PCs are deprived of resource access
5 A polity NPC wants them specifically 11 Critical briefing data is wrong or twisted
6 The PCs are expendable scout resources 12 Getting into or out of there is very hard

d8 Basic Nature of the Mission d20 Transhuman Twist or Vital Macguffin

1 Scout a believed-to-be-hazardous thing 1 Someone’s identity has been badly edited
2 Destroy the thing in question 2 Someone important is in hiding
3 Salvage or rescue the thing in question 3 A seemingly-benign goal is monstrous
4 Subvert or persuade the thing in question 4 An NPC cares nothing for their shell’s life
5 Build, erect, or instantiate the thing 5 An AI or VI is causing a problem
6 Sabotage the thing and frame a rival 6 Someone’s building or using dire tech
7 Roll 1d6; job changes to that mid-mission 7 A critical soulstone has been lost
8 Stop someone else; roll 1d6 for their goal

8 Grail access to something vital is limited
9 A recently re-embodied NPC has a grudge

d10 The Thing That is the Focus
10 An outside polity is getting involved

1 A populated deep-space habitat
11 Obscure polity doctrine is making trouble

2 A research or religious complex
12 A high-tech experiment has gone rogue

3 A data store or archive 13 There’s a traitor in an important position
4 A military station or complex 14 A war or hostile raid is going on there
5 Valuable land or an important space region 15 A grail is dangerously malfunctioning
6 A defector from the polity or a rival 16 A strange fad or ideology is interfering
7 A celebrity very useful to the polity 17 The desired macguffin is not as it seems
8 Someone important to a polity NPC 18 A traitor in the opposite side offers aid
9 An artificial intelligence or digital shell 19 Normal social expectations are subverted
10 A talented mercenary or agent 20 Someone fights for a near-lost ideology



Polity Mission Rewards •265 

Polity Mission Rewards

Many of the adventures a party will have in a trans-
human campaign will revolve around doing work for Complicated Jobs
one or more polities, either the groups that the PCs are The polity needs something done, but isn’t entirely sure 
aligned with or simply those outside organizations that how to accomplish it. The PCs need to go someplace 
are offering worthwhile rewards. The mission payment and use their own ingenuity and understanding of the 
tends to be roughly the same in both cases, as the grat- situation to bring about the outcome desired by their 
itude of a polity toward a loyal member serves much patron. Even when these jobs appear to be relatively 
the same practical purpose as the indebted obligation safe, they pay well because they require a great deal of 
of an outside patron. initiative and personal judgment from the operatives. 

The rewards offered by polities to capable oper- Any group capable of regular performance of these 
atives are extensive, but the jobs they need done are tasks will be able to live in the transhuman equivalent 
not the standard sort of reactor-cleaning jobs that any of luxury, with large amounts of personal space, nu-
low-ranking polity member could manage. The jobs merous sapient servants or companions, and a wide 
offered by polity leadership cadres are dangerous, dif- selection of shells to use as they desire. Such jobs usu-
ficult, and often must be deniable. Survival is by no ally pay 500 Face/level.
means assured, and in some cases a suicide mission 
might be an assumed part of the work, with reinstan- Veteran Jobs
tation of a soul in a new shell provided as part of the fee. At this level of work, the operatives are no longer run-

The pay a polity offers will depend on its own size of-the-mill mercenaries or standard polity enforcers, 
and the importance of the work. Every measure of Face but the proven experts at their trade who are sought 
they offer is the equivalent of so much grail time or so by employers throughout the transhuman sector. Mis-
much work by polity members, and small groups just sions for veteran operatives tend to be matters of sig-
don’t have the grails or membership to support huge nificant importance to the polity as a whole, with op-
payments, even if Face itself is a somewhat notional re- position too heavy or too skilled to be overcome by any 
source. The rewards offered here are baseline for a ma- ordinary agent. Often the polity sees no way to succeed 
jor polity with access to at least one major grail. Smaller at the job, but trusts that experts will somehow figure 
groups can likely offer only half as much, or even less. out a solution. Up to 10,000 Face/level are regularly 

Reward totals are given in Face here, but if you’re extended to groups capable of this work.
running a campaign where credits are still in use, you 
can multiply the Face rewards by 50 to get the equiva- Elite Jobs
lent amount of credits they would likely offer. Something critically important needs to be done, and 

Rewards are per-party, divided evenly amongst the polity can’t afford to have things go wrong. At this 
the PCs, and often scaled to the highest PC’s level. The level, they’re only giving the work to people who have 
more respected and experienced the mercenary or a demonstrated track record of success, but they’re 
member, the more their help is worth. also extremely flexible about the remuneration they’ll 

offer. Often, as much as 100,000 Face/level worth of 
Simple Jobs goods or services will be extended to PCs, or equivalent 
Go someplace relatively nearby and kill someone, de- resources that already exist will be signed over to PC 
stroy something, or collect something. Targets are ownership or placed at their regular disposal.
not expected to have any defenses sufficient to stop a 
professional group, though ugly surprises do happen. Critical Jobs
Performing this act is not expected to bring particular These are tasks where failure threatens vital polity re-
heat down on the group or have lasting negative con- sources, personnel, or the basic survival of the group. 
sequences with their relationship with other significant The leadership is unlikely to give this work to anyone 
polity groups. This work rewards 100 Face/level. but the most reliable, proven members or allied merce-

naries, but they will pay almost anything for successful 
Dangerous Jobs completion. Essentially, the PCs tell the polity what 
As a simple job, but there’s reason to believe that the they want, and if the polity can actually give it to them, 
target may have protection or environmental difficul- they get it. Of course, if they fail the polity may not be 
ties that would possibly result in the death of even a in much of a condition to do anything.
capable and professional group. This level of reward 
is also offered for simple jobs that might incur the dis-
pleasure of a major polity against the PCs who perform 
it. The work rewards 200 Face/level.



266• Space Magic

SPACE MAGIC
Any reader of this game is likely aware of dozens of Start by creating one or more spell lists for the 
other old-school game systems that have magic-using classes provided in this section. The Arcanist class 
character classes and a wealth of arcane sorcery. While should have a single broad spell list that its practi-
many groups will be perfectly happy to stick with tra- tioners all draw from, while the Magister class might 
ditional sci-fi tropes, some groups prefer a little more have multiple spell lists for different magical traditions. 
wizardry in their stellar endeavors, and so this section A Magister can draw from only one of these lists, rep-
provides you with guidelines for integrating existing resenting the particular tradition they belong to. If you 
old-school spells and magic use into a Stars Without want to save yourself effort, you might make up several 
Number campaign. Magister spell lists and then just declare that an Arcan-

Particularly adventurous groups might go so far ist can learn spells from any of them.
as to use Stars Without Number as the chassis for a Adepts are a special case, and are meant to rep-
straight-up fantasy game, using the Warrior and Ex- resent magical traditions that focus on personal em-
pert classes to represent doughty fighters and cunning powerment and alteration. Most often, you’ll simply 
thieves, and the additional classes in this section serv- be taking an old-school class with multiple intrinsic 
ing as more sorcerously-inclined heroes. magical powers and stripping it for parts to customize 

your own Adept classes.
Molding Your Magic
The first step in including these rules is for the GM to The Magic Skill
decide just what kind of magic she wants to include in In campaigns where sorcery is a matter of general con-
her campaign. She might decide to simply include the cern, a new skill is added to the list. Magic is the skill 
magic-user and cleric spell lists from Labyrinth Lord, related to both academic and practical use of sorcery. 
or import only the magic-user spells from Lamenta- Whenever a spellcaster attempts to puzzle out some 
tions of the Flame Princess, or perhaps devise a race of arcane mystery or use their spells in a way that seems 
sense-warping aliens who use the illusionist spell lists both plausible and risky, a Magic skill check can be 
from an early edition of one of TSR’s famed games. required. Intelligence is the attribute that usually mod-
Particularly industrious or inspired GMs might choose ifies such a roll, though almost any attribute might be 
spells from half a dozen different sources and compile used for certain situations or magical traditions.
them all into a particular list suitable for their game. For spells that require a hit roll to connect, the 

A cursory examination of these other OSR games caster may use their Magic skill as their combat skill, 
will show that almost all of them divide their spells into usually adding their Intelligence or Dexterity modifier 
multiple “levels” of increasing power, usually ranging as well depending on whether the attack relies more on 
from level 1 to level 9. As a general rule of thumb, you careful targeting or nimble hands.
probably don’t want to include spells higher than level Whenever a PC rolls or picks the Know skill as 
5 in your campaign. Beyond that power level, magical- part of their background, focus bonus skills, or other 
ly-gifted PCs start to have a degree of personal prowess picks, they may instead choose the Magic skill. A PC 
that’s drastically out of scale with non-arcane heroes. It does not have to have magical abilities to understand 
may be possible to enact these mighty enchantments the theory and technical details of sorcery, though their 
through complex rituals, advanced supporting tech- ability to employ their knowledge might be limited.
nology, or other roundabout means, but they should In some campaigns, GMs will prefer to split the 
not normally be powers at the ready disposal of PCs. Magic skill up even further, perhaps giving specific 

When you’re picking spells for your campaign, skills to each Magister school, or dividing different 
your main focus should be on your personal group of magical traditions into different skills. While this is 
players. It’s not necessary to imagine every possible a feasible choice, a GM should be careful not to parse 
sub-variety of sorcery in your personal cosmos, or to things too finely, and should allow cross-skill use in 
spend hours painstakingly crafting a dozen different most magical situations.
schools of magical adepts. It probably isn’t even neces- Importantly, a spellcaster cannot cast a spell of a 
sary to worry about the spell lists beyond level 2 or 3. level higher than their Magic skill plus one, even if 
Your job is to make sure that the magic fits with your their character level would normally allow them to 
campaign and provides options that are likely to inter- cast such potent enchantments. A magic-user needs to 
est your players. Don’t hesitate to straight-out ask your understand the basic theory and practice of their magic 
group if anyone wants to play a magically-gifted hero, before they can employ it effectively. This limit does 
and if so, the kind of magic they’d be most interested in not apply to Adepts, who often have no magical edu-
having. If you give yourself some warning time, you’ll cation at all, and it may also not apply to other magical 
have enough leisure to put together a basic arcane class traditions that owe more to lineage or random genius 
or two that fits your group’s needs. than focused education.



Space Magic •267 

Spells and Invocations Completing the spell requires a Main Action from 
The Arcanist and Magister classes listed below cast the caster, performed during their normal turn of ac-
spells. A GM can pick appropriate spells for their lists tion during the round. They may choose details of tar-
from their old-school games of choice, with the Arcan- geting and specific effects at the moment they cast they 
ist intended to be a generalist magic-user who can alter spell. If they decide that they really don’t want to cast 
their prepared spells to meet an anticipated situation, the spell after all, they lose their Main Action but will 
and the Magister meant to be a student of a particu- not waste the spell or the power used to fuel it. If the 
lar magical tradition that grants them less breadth but caster suffers so much as a single hit point of damage 
an easier time accessing the full scope of their powers. before they can complete the spell, however, it and 
For these classes you can lift spells directly from your their Main Action for the turn are both lost. The spell 
sources to make their spell lists, and you usually don’t still counts against any casting maximums for the day, 
have to change anything about the spells. but it fizzles away uselessly.

The Adept class, on the other hand, is meant to Invocations are much quicker and easier to cast 
emulate a particular type of magical adept who has a than spells, and largely impossible to interrupt. Most 
very restricted range of abilities that are very easy for invocations require a Main Action to cast, but they do 
them to invoke. Invocations emulate intrinsic magical not require announcement at the start of the turn and 
powers and special gifts that can’t be effectively inter- they cannot be interrupted by damage. Other invoca-
rupted and require no special preparation to employ. tions can be used as an Instant or On Turn action, or 

The easiest way to create an Adept’s invocations they might be constantly in effect once acquired.
is to just look at an existing old-school character class 
with intrinsic magical abilities. They’ll usually get spe- Learning Spells and Invocations
cial powers at certain levels, or boosted attack damage, Most spells require either a teacher or a magical-
or some other natural class ability. Each of those can be ly-charged instruction device in order to impart its 
treated as an invocation. Powers that require activation secrets. A mere text file might be able to describe what 
should be assigned an action type, either Main Action, a spell does, but without a magically-imbued training 
On Turn, or Instant depending on how long it seems object for a spellcaster to study, the spell’s true pat-
it should take to activate the ability, while flat bonuses terns of energy and meaning are impossible to discern. 
should be invocations that are constantly in effect. Traditionally, these training objects take the shape of 

You’re inevitably going to have to eyeball the final physical books, often called “grimoires”, as the tradi-
result a little and apply tweaks and adjustments to make tional methods of energy imprinting commonly focus 
sure the resultant Adept tradition is a suitable fit to on written codices.
your campaign. Just work with the player who’s going Without a grimoire or a willing teacher, a spell-
to have the PC to make something acceptable, as you caster cannot learn or use a given spell, even if it ap-
don’t have to balance things for random other people. pears on the spell list for their class. If the spell does not 

appear on their class spell list, they cannot learn it even 
Casting Magic with access to a teacher or grimoire. It simply is too far 
In science-fantasy campaigns, magic is divided between outside the scope of their magical education.
spells and invocations. Spells are arcane formulae, divine Learning a spell from a teacher requires one day 
prayers, lengthy rituals, and all other magic-creating per level of the spell. Learning it from a magically-im-
procedures that tend to take some time and undis- bued object requires one week per spell level. This 
turbed action in order to trigger. Invocations are in- training can be interrupted and resumed with no ill 
nate powers or gifts, either gained through long prac- effects, but a spellcaster can learn only one spell at a 
tice, granted via occult pacts, or simply intrinsic to the time. Most Magisters can expect to be taught the spells 
bloodline of the bearer. Invocations require much less of their tradition by a cooperative senior member of 
effort to trigger, but their bearers tend to be much less their order as they advance in level, though they might 
flexible in their powers than spellcasters. be called upon to perform a service for the tradition in 

To cast a spell, the spellcaster must declare their in- order to “prove their worthiness” to receive the knowl-
tent to cast a spell at the very start of the round, before edge. Arcanists have a less certain path forward, and 
any group has acted, and they must specify which spell must usually either find grimoires or convince other 
they intend to cast. Their efforts to begin casting will spellcasters to train them, often for a substantial fee in 
begin immediately. Most spellcasting is blatantly obvi- credits or service. In the absence of some other require-
ous, involving arcane gestures, stentorian incantations, ment, and assuming a willing teacher can be found, 
and occasional visible discharges of coalescing energy. such tutoring usually costs five hundred credits for a 
Most combatants in a culture where magic exists will first level spell, doubled for each ensuing spell level.
recognize spellcasting immediately, though it is usual- Only Arcanists and Magisters can learn spells. Ad-
ly impossible to tell what spell the spellcaster is trying epts are taught their invocations as part of their train-
to cast. A magic-user cannot normally cast any spells ing and gradual maturation, and gain their abilities 
if their hands are restrained or their mouth is gagged. automatically as they advance in experience. 



268• The Arcanist

The Arcanist

A purveyor of mystical secrets and a relentless scholar Spellcasting requires the dexterous manipulation 
of the unknown, the Arcanist is meant to represent of esoteric energy flows that are hindered by cumber-
a magic-user with a broad grasp of arcane principles some armor and exotic materials. If the Arcanist is 
and a catholic view toward magical theory. Arcanists wearing powered armor, including vestimentums, or 
sometimes form groups of like-minded researchers, but armor with an Encumbrance value higher than zero, 
their individuality and idiosyncratic academic views of- they cannot effectively cast spells, nor can they do so if 
ten makes it difficult for them to work closely together. their hands are bound or they are gagged.

Arcanists may learn two new spells from the Ar-
Arcanist Spellcasting canist spell list from any level they are capable of casting 
Arcanists all share the same spell list. At first level, they each time they advance a level, reflecting their own 
may pick a number of first level spells from this list research and study. They begin play knowing two first 
equal to two plus their Intelligence modifier. They be- level spells, plus their Intelligence modifier.
gin knowing these spells and may prepare their allowed Arcanists may choose their foci from the arcane 
spells per day from them. They may learn new spells as focus list in this section, and may choose one additional 
the opportunity arises, but they cannot learn a spell that bonus arcane focus at first level.
is not on the Arcanist list or that is a higher level than Arcanists gain Magic as a bonus skill. If the Magic 
they can actually cast. There is no limit to the number skill is split up into multiple sub-skills in this campaign, 
of spells an Arcanist can learn save for the need to find they can pick one of them for a bonus skill instead.
a teacher or grimoire from which to learn them.

An Arcanist must prepare their spells before cast- Partial Arcanist Abilities
ing them. Such preparation requires an hour of un- Some characters may wish to only dabble in an Arcan-
disturbed meditation, arcane exercises, and calculation, ist’s arts, selecting the Partial Arcanist class option as 
and can only be done once per day. The number of an Adventurer. Heroes who choose this option gain 
spells an Arcanist can have prepared at any one time the following traits.
depends on their character level; a novice Arcanist can Partial Arcanists suffer a -1 penalty on all hit point 
prepare only a single first level spell, while a master can dice they roll. Thus, a Partial Expert/Partial Arcanist 
have a dozen different incantations ready for use. The would roll 1d6-1 for their hit points each level, while 
adjacent table lists the number of spells of each level a Partial Warrior/Partial Arcanist would roll 1d6+1.
that the Arcanist can prepare each day. Partial Arcanists suffer a -1 penalty on their base 

An Arcanist may fill a higher-level slot with a low- attack bonus, as calculated by their other partial class. 
er-level spell if they wish, such as using a second level This penalty cannot reduce the hero’s base attack bonus 
spell slot to prepare a first level spell. Arcanists may below +0. If their other partial class is Magister, their 
also prepare multiple “copies” of a spell they expect to attack bonus is +0 at first level, +1 at fifth level, and +2 
see heavy use, preparing the same spell multiple times at tenth level.
in multiple slots. Partial Arcanists can learn and prepare Arcanist 

When an Arcanist casts a spell, it is discharged and spells as if an Arcanist of half their level, rounded up. 
must be prepared again before it can be used again. If For casting purposes, they are treated as their full level; 
they have multiple copies of a spell prepared, they can thus, if a spell does 1d6 points of damage per caster lev-
continue to use it until they run dry of available in- el, a 5th level Partial Arcanist does 5d6 damage with it.
cantations. Suffering hit point damage before they can Partial Arcanists are as limited as any other Ar-
successfully complete casting a spell also costs them the canist when it comes to casting spells in heavy armor. 
spell, as it fizzles uselessly and is lost for the day. While wearing powered armor, or any other armor 

with an Encumbrance value higher than zero, they 
Arcanist Class Abilities cannot effectively cast Arcanist spells.
Arcanists spend so much time in scholarly study that Partial Arcanists may learn one new spell from 
they lack the resilience of more active heroes. Their hit the Arcanist spell list from any level they are capable 
points are rolled as 1d6-1 each level, plus their Consti- of casting each time they advance a level, representing 
tution modifier. Each die’s total cannot be less than 1, the fruits of their private research.
even with the penalty. Partial Arcanists can choose arcane foci with their 

Arcanists spend very little time mastering mun- allowed focus picks. They do not gain the bonus arcane 
dane weaponry. Their base attack bonus is equal to focus that a full Arcanist gets.
their level divided by five, rounded down. Thus, at first Partial Arcanists gain Magic as a bonus skill. If the 
level, it’s +0, and doesn’t increase to +1 until level five, Magic skill is split up into multiple sub-skills in this 
and +2 at level ten. campaign, they can pick one of them for a bonus skill 

instead.



The Magister •269 

The Magister

A studious follower of a particular magical tradition or day. This spell may be from any of the first level spells 
sorcerous order, the Magister is heir to uncounted cen- they know, and it is not necessary for them to spe-
turies of arcane learning and focused erudition. While cifically prepare the spell as an Arcanist does. As they 
Magisters do not have the broad magical knowledge advance in power, they are able to cast more and more 
of an Arcanist, their focused study allows them more spells each day from higher levels of incantation. A Ma-
flexibility in employing their spells, and less need to gister can cast a lower-level spell with a higher-level 
prepare beforehand. slot if they so require, but this does not augment the 

spell or make it more effective.
Magister Spellcasting If a Magister suffers damage before they can suc-
Unlike Arcanists, Magisters focus on a restricted set cessfully complete the casting of a spell, the magical en-
of sorceries, and become intimately familiar with a ergy discharges harmlessly and the spell slot is wasted. 
relatively small number of spells. Their deep familiar- They can attempt to cast the spell again next round if 
ity with these spells allows them to cast them without they still have available slots for that level.
prior preparation, but it also prevents them from easily 
learning new spells or changing their existing list. Magister Class Abilities

At first level, a Magister picks two first level spells Magisters have the exact same class abilities and lim-
from their allowed list. Each time they advance a level, itations as an Arcanist, save for their special rules for 
they may learn additional spells from their list as given learning and casting spells. In campaigns where the 
by the Magister spell table. Each time they advance an Magic skill is split into multiple sub-skills, they have 
experience level, they may swap out up to two of their the sub-skill appropriate to their school as a bonus in-
existing spells for different picks of the same spell lev- stead of Magic.
els. A Magister cannot learn new spells outside this 
progression. If he wants to exchange a known spell Partial Magister Abilities
for a different one of the same level, beyond the two A Partial Magister uses the exact same rules as a Partial 
swaps granted by advancement each level, he must Arcanist, except that they cast spells from their Magis-
spend three months of study to exchange a single spell. ter spell list, and may learn them as if a Magister of half 
It is assumed that a Magister can pick from any of the their character level, rounded up. If a hero chooses to 
spells on their school’s spell list unless they are in ex- be a Partial Arcanist/Partial Magister, they keep their 
ceptionally bad odor with their fellows. spell lists separate; just because the hero knows a spell 

A Magister may cast their spells a certain number as an Arcanist doesn’t mean that they may cast it with 
of times per day depending on their level. At first level, Magister spell slots. The same separation applies to 
for example, they may cast a first level spell thrice per their available spell castings per day.

Arcanist Spells Prepared per Day Magister Spells Usable per Day

Arcanist Spell Levels Magister Spell Levels

Level 1 2 3 4 5 Level 1 2 3 4 5

1 1 - - - - 1 2/3 - - - -
2 2 - - - - 2 2/4 - - - -
3 2 1 - - - 3 3/5 2/2 - - -
4 3 2 - - - 4 3/6 2/3 - - -
5 3 2 1 - - 5 4/6 2/3 2/2 - -
6 3 3 2 - - 6 4/6 3/4 2/3 - -
7 4 3 2 1 - 7 5/6 3/4 2/3 2/2 -
8 4 3 3 2 - 8 5/6 4/5 3/4 2/3 -
9 5 4 3 2 1 9 5/6 4/5 3/4 3/3 2/2

10+ 5 4 3 3 2 10+ 5/6 4/6 3/5 3/4 2/3

The entries list the number of spells an Arcanist can Entries list the total spells known each level followed 
prepare each day of a given spell level. There is no by the spells castable each day. Thus, at second level, 
limit to the number of spells an Arcanist can learn a Magister knows two first-level spells, and may cast 
at each level, assuming a source is found for them. any combination of them up to four times a day.



270• The Adept

The Adept

The Adept is the catch-all class for those heroes with in- Adepts gain the special abilities of their chosen 
trinsic magical abilities that aren’t really spells, but are tradition. Often, some of these are obtained automat-
clearly supernatural in nature. Adepts can vary wildly ically at first level, while others are gained as the hero 
in their abilities; some might have incredible powers advances in experience. The GM may choose to adjust 
of bodily control, others might have a set of specific the timing of these abilities to smooth out progression.
elemental abilities they can invoke, while still others Adept abilities are invocations. Even when they 
might be able to invoke specific magical powers with a require a Main Action to activate, they cannot be in-
freedom and regularity even a Magister cannot match. terrupted by damage. Adept abilities may be used as 

The Adept class is designed as a framework to al- often as the specific ability allows; some have a limit of 
low a GM to bring in classes from other old-school so many uses per day, while others might be constantly 
games that rely on special abilities gained as a hero ad- in effect.
vances in character levels. These classes usually have Adepts may choose to pick their beginning and any 
a few basic powers at first level, and then gain more further earned foci from the arcane focus list in this 
special abilities as they advance. It’s likely that any im- section, though foci that have to do with spellcasting 
porting will require some tweaking and adjustment on are inapplicable to them.
the GM’s part, but this class can be used as a “container” 
to help organize these esoteric gifts. Partial Adept Abilities

When importing Adept traditions, be careful not Partial Adepts gain the special abilities of their cho-
to devalue the worth of other classes. A combat-fo- sen tradition as if they had an Adept level of half their 
cused Adept should be about as good as a Warrior, character level, rounded up. Where these abilities are 
rather than superior to one, and an Adept focused on influenced by character level, the hero’s full level is ap-
stealth should not be universally superior to an Expert plied. Thus, if an intrinsic ability gave them a +1 Armor 
cat burglar. The importance of this will vary with the Class bonus per level, a 5th level Partial Adept would 
PC makeup of your group. If you have no other War- gain a +5 bonus to their AC.
riors in the party, for instance, then you don’t have to Note that some Adept traditions involve granting 
be so careful about not stepping on their role. a hero a powerful base ability at first level that is then 

further elaborated or expanded as they advance. This 
type of tradition may not be suitable for a Partial Adept, 

Adept Class Abilities or the GM may have to clip back the base ability and 
Adepts roll 1d6 for their hit points each level, modified only give the rest of it back as the PC advances in level.
by Constitution. Partial Adepts may choose to pick their beginning 

Adepts have a base attack bonus equal to half their and any further earned foci from the arcane focus list 
level, rounded down. Thus, it’s +0 at first level. Specific in this section, though foci that have to do with spell-
Adept traditions may give bonuses to this. casting are inapplicable to them.

The Incandescent Order

As an example of an Adept class, the Incandescent Or- Any trained adept of the Order can identify a po-
der wields the “power of the Glow” as their inner spiri- tential acolyte’s Glow potential with a few weeks of 
tual purity made manifest through light. The theocratic training. Most people have no ability to wield it what-
ruling institution of several remote star systems, the soever, and some have only a limited gift, but a few 
Order is currently divided between the Exultants, who can be taught to become full priests of the light. The 
believe that the gift of the Glow is a sign of absolute education usually requires four or five years to set a 
spiritual authority over less-gifted sentients, and the novice on the path to eventual mastery.
Abstainers, who believe that a Glow-gifted leader can The Order itself is philosophically devoted to the 
still fall into serious acts of sin. Holy Light, the radiance of truth, justice, and purity 

The two factions are nominally at peace, but a vi- that the Light embodies. Those who die for the cause 
cious secret war is waged between them over ultimate will know the eternity happiness of radiant truth, while 
control over Order space and the Radiant Hierarchy the wicked will be cast forever into the Dark Hells of 
that rules it. Losers of this religious debate and those ignorance and confusion. The Exultants insist that 
disillusioned with the conflict have been forced to flee anyone who wields the Glow can only temporarily be 
Order space for more distant worlds, bringing their confused by sin, while the Abstainers view the Glow 
discipline with them. merely as one more tool with which to serve the Light.



The Adept •271 

Class Abilities Visual Interdict (Level 3): Commit Effort for the scene as 
Order Adepts use the normal class abilities for Adepts an On Turn action. You become invisible for the 
except as noted below. rest of the scene and immune to laser weaponry 

Order Adepts gain Glow as a bonus skill. Glow is or laser tripwires. This invisibility breaks if you 
used to control and apply the powers of the Order, and make an attack or other violent motion. Attacks 
may be used as a combat skill for Glow-based attacks. from invisible ambush grant +4 to hit and dam-

Gain Order Effort equal to one plus their Glow age, but do not usually count as Execution Attacks 
skill plus the highest of their Wisdom or Charisma from page 52 unless the other requirements of 
attribute modifiers. Order Effort works much like a such an attack are fulfilled.
psychic’s Effort, being Committed and recovered in Veil of Noon (Level 4): Commit Effort for the scene as 
the same way, and is used to fuel Order powers. Order an On Turn action to gain the visual appearance 
Effort and Psychic Effort are tracked separately. of any object or person between 50% and 150% of 

Order Adepts have a base attack bonus equal to your height and weight. This appearance conceals 
half their character level, rounded down. At first and any clothing or equipment you may be carrying, 
fifth level, the adept gains a cumulative +1 bonus to but its falseness is obvious on touch, and it does 
their base attack bonus. Thus, at first level their attack not alter your voice. The illusion lasts for the rest 
bonus would be +1, and at fifth level it would be +4. of the scene or until dropped.

Adepts gain special Order Glow abilities at the Torrent of Dawn (Level 5): Commit Effort for the day as 
levels listed below. an On Turn action to blast visible targets within 

100 meters with a blaze of laser energy. A total 
Partial Class Abilities number of targets equal to one plus the adept’s 
Partial Order Adepts use the Partial Adept rules as usu- Glow skill can be hit, and each is automatically hit 
al, save for those listed below. for 1d10 damage for every two levels of the adept, 

Partial adepts gain Glow as a bonus skill, just as rounded down. An Evasion saving throw halves 
full Order members do. the damage they take, and a single target can’t be 

Partial adepts have Order Effort equal to one plus hit by more than one blast.
half their Glow skill, rounded up. They do not add their Piercing Radiance (Level 5): Commit Effort for the 
Wisdom or Charisma attribute modifiers to this total. scene as a Move action to cut a hole two meters 

Partial adepts gain Order powers as if they were square through up to two meters of any substance 
half their full character level, rounded up. They may weaker than TL 4 military fortifications. Against 
use these powers at their full character level. Thus, a fortifications, this takes two rounds of this ability. 
first level partial Order adept has the 1st level Order This piercing laser requires a stationary target, so 
power. At third level, they gain the 2nd level Order it is not normally effective against mobile enemies. 
power, and so forth. They would use these abilities as If somehow applied to an immobile living target, 
a character of their level, so a fourth level Partial Order it does five points of damage per character level.
Adept does 1d10 damage with The Light Within. Photonic Lift (Level 6): Commit Effort as an On Turn 

action. While Committed, the adept can repel 
Powers of the Glow himself from the ground through the emission of 
The Light Within (Level 1): Commit Effort as an On countergravitic luminal waves. The adept can fly 

Turn action. While Committed, you may radiate at twice their normal movement rate, hovering 
light up to a 20-meter radius, project bolts of light freely as needed and lifting up to one hundred ki-
doing 1d6 damage up to 50 meters away, and ig- lograms of additional weight.
nore up to your character level in hit points of Radiant Shield (Level 7): Commit Effort as an On Turn 
laser damage from any given attack. At fourth action. While Committed, you and all allies with-
level the damage of these bolts increases to 1d10, in 10 meters are immune to harmful light, lasers, 
and at seventh level they become 2d6. Their attack radiation, or other radiant energies.
rolls use the Glow skill and Dexterity modifiers for Tangible Light (Level 8): Commit Effort for the scene 
combat purposes. to create a simple physical object of solid light no 

The Light Without (Level 2): Commit Effort for the larger than 3 meters square. It has hit points equal 
scene as an On Turn action. Conjure a purely to twice your level and vanishes at the scene’s end.
visual illusion within 60 meters, the image oc- Flickering Leap (Level 9): Commit Effort for the day as 
cupying no more than five meters’ radius. The a Move action to leap to any location visible with 
image appears perfectly realistic but is intangible your unaided sight as a bolt of pure radiance.
and soundless. The illusion lasts for the rest of the Flesh of Light (Level 10): Commit Effort for the day as an 
scene; you can control it with a Move action, caus- On Turn action to become an intangible form of 
ing it to move or changing its location. Invisibility light for one round. You can move freely through 
is not an illusion, though you can create the image non-solid matter and can use your Glow powers, 
of an opaque object in front of something. but are immune to mundane matter and energy.



272• Arcane Foci

Arcane Foci

The foci listed below are generally restricted to PCs 
with magical abilities, whether Arcanists, Magisters, Initiate of Healing
or Adepts. Most of them augment a caster’s sorcerous This focus can only be taken by Arcanists or Magisters 
abilities, though a few add additional perks suitable for with access to healing spells in their regular spell lists, 
a magically-focused hero. not including those who add them via other foci or 

If a GM is adapting an existing OSR class into an means. With it, a magic-user can translate the poten-
Arcanist, Magister, or Adept from these rules, unique tial energies of their available spells into enchantments 
abilities that don’t fit neatly in the existing framework of physical mending and revitalization. These simple 
can be treated as foci that the PC must take at the ap- magics cannot cure diseases or poisons and cannot re-
propriate levels, acquiring them in place of their usual place lost limbs, but they can heal any victim not too 
free choice at first level or ensuing levels. While this far gone to be saved by a lazarus patch.
does limit a PC’s versatility to a degree, in most cases Level 1: The user may expend a spell slot to heal a visible 
they already have plenty of uniqueness simply by virtue ally within 30 meters for 1d6 points of damage per 
of their character class. If there’s only one Scion of the spell level expended, plus the caster’s Magic skill. 
Emerald Blade in your campaign, it doesn’t matter too Invoking this healing takes a Main Action, but it 
much if she has to take a specific set of abilities. is an invocation and cannot be interrupted.

Level 2: The user is so efficient at triggering natural 
Armored Technique healing in a subject that they can call upon the 
Applicable only to Arcanists and Magisters, this focus subject’s natural physical reserves rather than their 
reflects a hero’s determined practice at channeling ar- own magical energies. As a Main Action, they can 
cane energy flows around the encumbrance of heavy touch a willing subject and heal up to 1d6 points 
armor and unnatural high-tech materials. of damage for every three character levels the user 
Level 1: You may cast Arcanist or Magister spells while possesses, rounded up. This healing adds one Sys-

wearing street or combat armor with an Encum- tem Strain to the target, and cannot be performed 
brance value no higher than one, or in powered if the target is unable to take the strain.
armor with a zero Encumbrance value.

Level 2: You may cast Arcanist or Magister spells re- Limited Study
gardless of the bulk of your armor. This arcane focus is special in that it can be taken by 

anyone, even those without an arcane class, assuming 
Cross-Disciplinary Study the GM allows it in her campaign. It reflects a limited 
Applicable only to Magisters, this allows a hero to learn or partial study of the arcane arts, just enough to mas-
a spell from the Arcanist list or from a Magister school ter the casting of a handful of spells. An Arcanist or 
other than their own. They must find a source willing Magister may also take it, to reflect an outside research 
and able to teach them the spell, and it must be of a level topic, but they cannot cast these learned spells with 
they can cast, though if taken at first level, it’s assumed their usual spell slots.
that a tutor or grimoire was found for the spell. Level 1: You may learn a single Arcanist or Magister 
Level 1: You may pick one spell of any level you can cast. spell of a level no greater than half your own, 

This spell is now known to you. You can change rounded up. You can change this spell once per 
this spell once per experience level, assuming you level if you can find a tutor for the spell you want 
can find a source for the new spell. to study. You do not need to prepare this spell, 

Level 2: You may pick one spell for each spell level you and can cast it once per day. Your familiarity with 
are capable of casting, and may change each of it is such that you can even cast it while wearing 
them once per experience level as noted above. armor, without needing Armored Technique. The 

spell is cast using your full character level for any 
Imprinted Spell level-dependent effects.
Applicable only to Arcanists, this focus is for a hero Level 2: Your limited study has expanded. You may learn 
who has so perfectly readied a spell that they no longer a second spell of a level no greater than half your 
need to prepare it before casting it. They may cast it in character level, rounded up. You may cast this 
place of any other spell of equal or higher level, losing spell once per day with the same limits as above.
the spell in that slot in order to fuel the sudden casting.
Level 1: You may imprint one spell of any level you can Petty Sorceries

cast. You can change this spell once per experience The character is capable of producing minor effects in 
level to another spell you know. line with their general style of magic – phantom sounds, 

Level 2: You may change your imprinted spell once per small and obvious illusions, non-damaging puffs of en-
day, when you prepare your other spells. ergy or light, minor physical transformations, or any 



Arcane Foci •273 

other trifling magical effect that fits with their tradition as they wish. Any spell they cast that does hit point 
and isn’t so powerful as to cause damage or directly damage does an additional +1 damage per die.
affect an unwilling target. This focus has only one level. Level 2: The spellcaster can convert their magical en-
Level 1: The caster can invoke these abilities freely for ergy into raw damaging force. The user casts a 

flavor and role-playing style, but they can only be spell normally, but at the moment of release, they 
concretely useful in play once per game session. transform it into a blast of violent energies that 
The GM decides whether or not the concrete use inflicts 1d6+1 damage per level of the converted 
proposed for an effect is appropriate in scale. spell to any single target within 100 meters. This 

damage includes the bonus level 1 grants to harm-
Psychic Synergy ful spells.
Some magic-using heroes have both arcane and psychic 
powers. This focus allows them to blur the lines be- Vast Erudition
tween their abilities, fueling different spheres of effect Applicable only to Arcanists, the hero is extremely well-
with their separate pools of energy. versed in magical theory and practical spell deployment. 
Level 1: Once per day as an Instant action, Commit Psy- They automatically know all the usual Arcanist spells 

chic Effort for the day to cast any spell you have of certain levels. This does not include any esoteric en-
prepared, if an Arcanist, or known, if a Magister, chantments that may have been devised by individual 
or fuel an Adept power that requires Effort to be practitioners.
Committed. Conversely, you may instead trade Level 1: You automatically know all standard first level 
one available spell slot of your highest level to re- Arcanist spells. When you advance a level, you 
fresh half its level in Committed Effort, rounded learn four new spells instead of two.
up, or Commit a point of Adept Effort for the day Level 2: You automatically know all standard Arcanist 
to restore a point of Committed Psychic Effort. spells of levels less than the maximum spell level 

Level 2: You may convert your power twice per day. you can cast. Thus, if you can cast fourth level 
spells, you know all standard Arcanist spells of 

Savage Sorcery levels one through three.
The spellcaster’s powers are keenly attuned to violence 
and destruction. Even when bereft of other magical re- War Caster
sources, they can still call upon a blast of magical power Your hero is accustomed to casting in combat, and can 
appropriate to their tradition or character traits. Some keep focus when less hardened minds would be hope-
casters might hurl bolts of crackling lightning, while lessly distracted by pain.
others could employ lasers, pillars of flame, or lances of Level 1: When injured while casting a spell, you may 
concussive telekinetic force. This focus is usually tak- make a Physical saving throw to avoid losing it. 
en by Arcanists or Magisters, but some Adepts might Even if your spell is interrupted, you do not lose 
benefit from the first level. the spell slot; only your action is wasted.
Level 1: As a Main Action invocation, the spellcaster can Level 2: Whenever you would lose a spell to an inter-

blast a visible target within 100 meters with a bolt ruption, accept damage equal to twice the spell’s 
that does 1d8 damage plus their character level if level to continue casting it. If this damage would 
it successfully hits, with the hit roll modified by reduce you to zero hit points, you complete the 
their Magic skill. They may use this bolt as often casting before passing out, stable but at zero HP.



274• Heroic Characters

HEROIC CHARACTERS
The default tone of Stars Without Number is that of 
gritty sci-fi. PCs are capable and talented men and Creating a Heroic PC
women, but they are most emphatically mortal. They When building a budding hero of interstellar legend, 
fail even when it’s critical that they succeed, they die the usual rules for character creation are followed, with 
when people shoot them, and they have no particular the changes listed below.
narrative armor against the horrors of an uncaring 
galaxy. Even the most experienced PC is subject to the •	 To get their attribute scores, Heroic PCs roll 4d6 
limits of normal human capabilities. six times, dropping the lowest die each time and 

Not every group cares for that tone. Sometimes assigning the six scores as desired. If none of the 
the players will want something more space-operatic scores are 18, one roll may be replaced with an 
in flavor, with heroes sporting the skill and prowess of 18. If the player would rather assign an array to 
action heroes and legendary icons in the making. Other their attributes instead of risking the dice, they 
groups will want to use Stars Without Number for par- may place the following rolls as they wish: 18, 14, 
ticular settings or worlds where the PCs are just bet- 13, 12, 10, 9.
ter than the rank and file of common humanity, more 
capable or more gifted. Some GMs might just want to •	 Heroic character classes are similar to their nor-
run a one-on-one campaign with a friend or family mal versions, but have additional benefits. The 
member, ushering a single shining hero through their changes to each class are listed below.
own personal arc of adventure.

For these groups, a heroic campaign is an option. •	 Heroic PCs have half the maximum possible hit 
In such a campaign, the PCs are a very distinct cut points for their class, level, and Constitution 
above the ordinary run of stellar adventurers. Even modifier, rounded up Thus, if a 3rd level Warrior 
fresh from character creation, they can knock down could theoretically have 24 hit points at most, a 
ordinary foes and overcome challenges that would Heroic Warrior of that level has 12 hit points. A 
leave an experienced normal PC sweating. Of course, in first level Heroic Arcanist with Constitution 13 
such heroic campaigns, such talent is often a requisite who could have at most 5 hit points would have 3.
for bare survival, as the dangers these heroes face are 
often far more dramatic than those essayed by ordinary •	 Heroic PCs get the usual number of foci at first 
humanity. level, but they can pick a new focus at every 

It should be a mutual group decision to play a he- even-numbered character level instead of the 
roic campaign. Not every GM will want to run one, and usual progression.
not every player will want to play in one. Even so, if 
everyone involved is on board with the idea, the guide- Unless noted above, Heroic PCs follow all the usual 
lines below will show you how to forge these brilliant rules and guidelines for creating characters, gaining 
starfarers and challenge them with fitting perils. experience, and advancing in character level.



Heroic Characters •275 

Heroic Character Classes

Heroic PCs follow the same class categories as their These class descriptions include mention of a Fray 
more human peers, but their abilities are even more Die, which is fully explained on the following page. If a 
pronounced. For instance, a Heroic Warrior has the Heroic Adventurer has multiple Fray Die options, they 
same hit point bonus and extra combat focus of an or- can pick one to use on any given combat round.
dinary Warrior, but he also has a lethally unerring eye As usual, most NPCs do not have a character class, 
against common foes and a reaction speed that ensures and they most certainly do not have a Heroic character 
he beats any normal opponent to the draw. class. A soldier is just a soldier, he is not a Warrior. In 

A player should pick a Heroic class for their new- some exceptional cases the GM might give class abil-
ly-forged hero when they come to that stage of char- ities to a particular NPC, but truly dangerous foes are 
acter creation. The details given below describe how more likely to be built with the Nemesis rules later in 
these classes vary from the normal form, in addition this section, the better to portray the dark and terrible 
to details on the optional arcane classes in this book. foes appropriate to a space-operatic tale.

Heroic Adventurers Heroic Arcanists
As the normal Adventurer class, but a Heroic Adven- As the normal Arcanist class, but gain one extra spell 
turer can take three partial classes, or one full normal preparation slot for every level you are capable of cast-
class and one partial class. Thus, they might choose to ing. In addition, gain bonus slots equal to your char-
be a normal Warrior and a Partial Expert, or a normal acter level; you can use these bonus slots to cast any 
Psychic and a Partial Arcanist, or a three-way Partial spell you know, whether or not you’ve prepared the 
Warrior-Expert-Psychic. spell and regardless of the spell’s level. If used to fuel 

abilities that require burning spell slots, treat them as 
Heroic Experts slots of the highest level the Arcanist can cast. Arcanists 
As the normal Expert class, but once per scene, the PC and Partial Arcanists roll 1d4 for their Fray die, but can 
can treat any non-combat, non-psychic skill check re- apply it to any enemy, and not just lesser foes.
lated to their background or concept as if they rolled 
a natural 12. They may choose to use this ability after Heroic Magisters
rolling the dice. Experts and Partial Experts roll 1d6 As the normal Magister class, but you learn one extra 
for their Fray die. spell per level you are capable of casting. In addition, 

choose one spell from every level you are capable of 
Heroic Psychics casting; you may cast these chosen spells as often as 
As the normal Psychic class, but Heroic Psychics have you wish, though you can’t use them to fuel foci or 
one bonus point of maximum Effort, gain one extra abilities that require you to burn spell slots. You can 
skill point to be spent on psychic skills and techniques change which spells you nominate for free casting with 
each time they advance a character level, and can pick a day’s work. Magisters and Partial Magisters roll 1d4 
four psychic disciplines as bonus skills at first level in- for their Fray die, but can apply it to any enemy, and 
stead of two. As usual, no single psychic skill can start not just lesser foes.
higher than level-1 during character creation. Psychics 
and Partial Psychics roll 1d4 for their Fray die, but can Heroic Adepts
apply it to any enemy, and not just lesser foes. Because an Adept class tends to have so many unique 

and specific powers, it’s not possible to provide a single 
Heroic Warriors easy template for scaling it upwards. Some GMs will 
As the normal Warrior class, but their attack rolls al- be able to boost a given Adept class relatively easily, 
ways hit lesser foes, those enemies with equal or fewer giving it additional abilities or giving them access to 
hit dice than the PC has character levels. Heroic War- higher-level powers at a lower PC level. Other Adept 
riors always win initiative in combat unless surprised classes are resistant to such changes. In most cases, the 
or facing other Heroic Warriors. In the latter case, both simplest solution is to let such a PC be a Heroic Ad-
roll normally and act before other combatants. War- venturer, taking the full normal Adept class and then a 
riors and Partial Warriors roll 1d8 for their Fray die. partial class appropriate to their general concept. If the 

Adept’s magical abilities are mainly combat-oriented, 
their Fray die is 1d6. If the Adept’s abilities are less 
martially-focused, their Fray die is 1d4. In both cases, 
they can apply the damage to any target, and not only 
those who are lesser foes.



276• Heroic Combat

Heroic Combat

When the greatest warriors in the sector clash, com- only the first 1 HD thug it hit, but the next two thugs as 
mon mortals fare poorly. Heroic combat shares almost well, provided none of them had an AC better than 16.
all of the same mechanics and rules as normal combat, If the damage is area-effect in nature, it does not 
but it is very different in two important respects: the overflow. Each victim in range suffers the rolled dam-
way damage is calculated and applied, and the existence age. A grenade that inflicts 2 points of damage on its 
of the Fray Die. victims would wipe out any normal soldiers in range, 

but the excess would not be inflicted on any unlucky 
Counting Heroic Damage veterans among them.
When damage dice are rolled in a Heroic campaign, If the damage done is fixed for some reason, such 
they are not read straight. Instead, each die is compared as a hazard or a power that always does 10 points of 
to the table below and that much damage is done. If the damage, one point is inflicted for every 4 original 
roll has a bonus, the bonus is applied only to the highest points of damage, rounded down.
single die in the roll.

Healing Heroic Damage
Damage Die Roll Damage Inflicted Any healing effects, whether from stims or biopsionics, 

1 No Damage are rolled on the damage table and applied accordingly. 
2–5 1 point Thus, a healing stim that would normally heal 1d6+2 

damage will instead heal anywhere from 1 to 2 points 
6–9 2 points of heroic damage.
10+ 4 points

Lesser Foes and Worthy Foes
Thus, if a 2d8+2 mag rifle hit rolled a 5 and a 2, Some abilities distinguish between “lesser foes” and 

the roll would count as 7 and 2, inflicting a total of 3 “worthy foes”. The former is any NPC target with hit 
points of damage. If a space wizard hurled a sphere of dice equal or lesser than the actor’s character level or 
explosive thermal energy at a group that did 8d6 dam- hit dice, while the latter is any target with more hit 
age, each die would be counted, resulting in potentially dice than the actor has levels or hit dice. Heroic PCs 
0 to 16 points of damage. are never lesser foes, regardless of their level.

PCs subtract this hit point damage from their total 
as normal. NPCs, however, subtract it from their hit The Fray Die
dice. Thus, that mag rifle hit would instantly drop a A Heroic PC is dangerous. Even the most pacifistic 
3 HD veteran soldier. Normal NPCs do not have hit character is capable of besting ordinary foes when 
points; they only count their hit dice. Special “Neme- forced to it, and veteran combatants can take out half 
sis” NPCs may have hit points and may be substantially an alien bar without spilling their beer. The general 
harder to bring down. halo of violence that Heroic PCs emanate is expressed 

Damage in excess of that needed to drop a target in their Fray Die. This die represents the casual blows, 
can be spread as overflow to any other target the initial snap shots, passing backhands, and quick psychic bursts 
attack roll could have hit. For example, if that mag rifle that a Heroic PC employs even when their attention is 
shot was enough to hit AC 16, it could bring down not focused on something else.

Once every round, as an On Turn action, the PC 
may roll their Fray Die and apply the damage to any 
single lesser foe within range of their weapons, fists, or 

Why the Table? abilities. For psychic powers and casual magical abili-
Why use the conversion table instead of just di- ties, the usual effective range is out to thirty meters. If 
viding damage by three or some other formula? the damage is more than enough to drop the target, the 
Wouldn’t that be simpler? overflow is applied normally to another valid target.

Stars Without Number is built to interface A PC’s Fray Die can normally only be applied to 
well with a wide range of other old-school games, lesser foes, as serious opponents are too skilled and 
many of which involve enemies that roll large dangerous to be dispatched so easily. Classes that use 
damage dice or that have large bonuses to damage psychic or supernatural powers, however, can apply 
rolls. Using the table evens out these variances; their Fray Die even to worthy foes, as their abilities 
a foe that does 1d20 damage and a foe that does are less susceptible to being countered.
1d12+4 damage both work out to “a really big Ranged weapons that use ammunition don’t ex-
hit”, while there is still a meaningful difference pend any in the course of making a Fray Die attack. The 
between a 1d4 knife and a 1d8 bullet. blaze of gunfire is just part of the general scene, and 

unless the gun is actually out of ammo, it can be used.



Heroic Combat •277 

Fray Dice are not modified by bonuses or penalties. Heroic PCs Auto-Stabilize
A Heroic Warrior with a 1d8 Fray Die always rolls 1d8, If reduced to zero hit points by a theoretically-surviv-
regardless of their skills or attributes. able injury, Heroic PCs always automatically stabilize. If 

hurt again, however, they die as usual unless the group 
Focused Fray has agreed on different rules for PC mortality.
As an option, a hero who is particularly determined to 
harm a target can use their Main Action to inflict their Vehicle and Starship Damage
Fray Die damage on the enemy, whether or not it is a Damage is rolled and inflicted normally for vehicular 
lesser foe. A PC who chooses to use a Focused Fray in and starship combat, rather than referring to the table. 
a round cannot use their Fray Die in the normal way. In the case that PCs or NPCs are shooting at a vehicle, 

This option exists for those players who wish to they roll their damage dice normally, apply the vehicle’s 
avoid the potential frustration of a missed hit roll and Armor, and subtract the result from the vehicle’s hit 
are willing to accept the lesser damage of a Fray Die. points. If a vehicle shoots at PCs or NPCs, the damage 

uses the table before being subtracted from the target 
No Shock Damage PC’s hit points or target NPC’s hit dice. A starship-sized 
Shock damage rarely fits the idiom of heroic adventure, weapon shooting at human-sized targets is something 
so it is ignored for these campaigns. that usually leaves only a rapidly-expanding gas cloud.

Defying Doom Solo Heroes

Sometimes a hero is in a dire situation, one that seems A Heroic PC is roughly equal to four ordinary PCs 
certain to spell the end of their adventure. Maybe of the same level when it comes to overcoming 
they’ve found themselves plummeting off the edge of challenges and dealing with foes in combat. It’s 
a floating sky-city, or locked in a chamber that can only quite possible to run an adventure originally de-
be unsealed by a particular species of alien, or confront- signed for an entire party with just a single lev-
ed with a mission-critical text that can only be read by el-appropriate Heroic PC.
someone with skills they don’t possess. In such situa- As a consequence, some GMs might enjoy 
tions, they may choose to Defy Doom. running solo campaigns for a particular friend, 

To Defy Doom, the PC takes 1d4 damage per spouse, child, or newbie to the hobby. Using a 
character level they possess, rolling the damage and Heroic PC can help the player get through events 
applying it immediately. If the harm reduces them to and situations that might summarily dispose of a 
zero hit points, they are instead left at one hit point and single ordinary character.
prey to the full horror of the situation. If the damage GMs who do run solo campaigns are encour-
fails to reduce them to zero hit points, they somehow aged to keep rules like Defying Doom in mind, as 
survive or bypass their peril. They can suggest a twist there may be a number of situations where the 
in the plot if they wish, or the GM can simply narrate hero lacks some crucial skill or is beset by some 
their amazing stroke of luck or skill. otherwise-inescapable difficulty. Repeated use 

Pushing their luck this way comes at a price. The of Defying Doom will wear the hero down until 
damage inflicted by Defying Doom cannot be healed failure is inevitable, but judicious invocation can 
until the adventure is over, and every time the PC De- carry a hero through considerable lethal peril.
fies Doom in the same adventure, the size of the die GMs who run solo games should also be pre-
they roll increases by one step. Thus, the second time pared for things to move much, much faster than 
they Defy Doom, they roll 1d6 per character level. The at a conventional table. With only one player to 
third time, 1d8, and so forth until the truly unlucky PC make decisions, choices come much more rapidly 
is rolling 1d20 each time. The die size does not reset and events can veer much farther away from the 
until the adventure concludes or the PC abandons it. expected baseline. A group will tend to correct for 

Defying Doom is a mechanic that works particu- its most outlying impulses, with people moderat-
larly well for single-PC gaming, with just the GM and ing their choices so as to complement their fellow 
one player. Adventures often assume a band of PCs players. With only one PC, there’s no such thing. 
with a wide range of abilities, and a solo hero can have a Be ready to take the campaign in completely new 
hard time handling challenges that fall far outside their directions should your player decide that some 
concept. If playing in a full group the GM may choose new goal is more enticing or some new place 
to disallow Defying Doom, as a band of Heroic PCs more interesting to explore. While this can be a 
really ought to have all the skills they need for dealing challenge to GMs, it’s also much easier to satisfy 
with the situations they encounter. A Defied Doom the play goals of only one player at a time.
that saves a whole party should inflict damage on all.



278• Challenging Heroic PCs

Challenging Heroic PCs

As a GM, your basic toolbox for challenging PCs doesn’t As a consequence, most GMs will have a strong 
need too much of an overhaul to handle Heroic PCs. urge to throw major enemies at the group in combat; 
The key thing to keep in mind is to make sure the group titans of war and legions of veteran soldiers, all to make 
has a goal worthy of its prowess. A group of Heroic PCs the PCs genuinely sweat. To some extent, this is an 
is the sort of band to bring down a sector hegemon or appropriate part of the genre; space operas usually do 
win an age-old war against an implacable alien foe. If have a large supply of more-than-human warriors. A 
the group’s ambition doesn’t fit well as a tag line on a GM should be careful, however, to make sure that these 
space opera, they may be thinking too small. martial perils are logical and appropriate to the setting. 

Aside from that, however, there are a few common If you’ve established that the city-state of Quar is po-
classes of challenges that bear special mention. liced by genetically-enhanced enforcers, then throwing 

a squad of 3 hit die street cops at the heroes is perfectly 
Social Challenges logical. If these grizzled veterans pop up only because 
Heroic Experts with a social-oriented concept are going the PCs had too easy a time busting the heads of the 
to cut through most social challenges in a hurry. If their locals two planets away, however, it becomes more 
native skills and foci don’t do it, their Heroic Expert difficult to justify.
class skill will. When such a PC breaks out their class 
ability, let them win if it’s at all plausible. They may not Nemesis Foes
get everything they want, and what they get may come Some enemies are special. Even the mightiest normal 
with unpleasant complications, but they should never human is unlikely to have more than 10 hit dice and 
feel like they’ve wasted their effort when they employ will be apt to fall swiftly under the guns of a party of 
their special abilities. heroes. For true challenges and the sort of dark perils 

The key with social challenges is to think past that befit a heroic campaign, the GM can use Nemeses.
the immediate situation. All right, so the Expert has A Nemesis is built just like an ordinary NPC or 
the Chatelaine of the High Port eating out of his hand. alien creature, but has a few modifications made to its 
She’ll gladly support the party’s expedition to the radio- usual baseline combat statistics.
active surface below the space station. The Chatelaine First, a Nemesis has hit points equal to its hit dice 
obviously has enemies, however, and there are doubt- times four. The damage it takes is subtracted from 
less all manner of people upset and troubled at this turn these hit points, not hit dice. A grizzled veteran with 3 
of events. The PC can’t charm or bamboozle them all, HD, for example, would have 12 hit points as a Nemesis.
and the deeper he insinuates himself into local affairs, Second, all the damage a Nemesis inflicts is read 
the more enemies and potential allies he’s going to en- straight, without conversion through the table. If that 
counter. It’s all right for the PC to “win” the situation, Nemesis veteran shoots a PC with a 1d8 revolver, the 
because there is always another situation behind it. PC takes 1d8 hit points of damage straight.

Third, the Nemesis has a Fray Die, usually 1d8, 
Investigative Challenges though perhaps even higher or somewhat lower. This 
Heroic PCs have the tools to beat a lot of mysteries, damage affects PCs and is inflicted straight. Thus, the 
and if the Defying Doom rule is used, they might even Nemesis above could do automatically do 1d8 damage 
be able to pull meaning out of an impenetrable clue if each round to a single PC within range.
it’s necessary to advance their goals. When you build Fourth, all Nemeses get a +4 bonus to hit rolls.
mystery-based adventures for them, plan on the secret A Nemesis does not have to be a high hit die foe. 
being learned rapidly, and make the it more about the Even an ordinary trooper can be a Nemesis if they have 
consequences of the discovery or proving it to others. some special significance, and you shouldn’t feel obli-

gated to make every Nemesis a 10 hit die, 40 hit point 
Combat Challenges beast. Any adventure-significant foe could be a valid 
Heroic PCs are going to mow through ordinary thugs Nemesis, so long as they have importance to the party.
and goons, especially if they have a Heroic Warrior A single Nemesis will usually defeat any PC with 
among them. Large groups of enemies can still be a the same level as the Nemesis’ hit dice, though a War-
serious threat to the party, but one-on-one, common rior can sometimes pull out a victory against a low-level 
humans have almost no chance of winning a fight with Nemesis with few hit points. They will probably de-
the group. The simple existence of the Fray Die means feat any two PCs of that level, and they will present a 
that the group is going to take out its weight in 1 HD significant but probably-beatable challenge to groups 
mooks every round, plus whoever they actually deign of three or more same-level PCs. If the Nemesis has 
to shoot personally. Even when the opposition is a real multiple attacks per round, such as with an alien beast 
threat, heroic damage scaling ensures that the PCs can or superlatively-skilled warrior, they’ll likely overcome 
survive a few hits even at first level. one more PC for every additional attack they get.



Stars Without Number Character Sheet
Name Administer Pilot Work Hitpoints / Conditions Max: Attributes

Connect Program Biopsionics 3 (-2)  |  4-7 (-1)  |  8-13 (+0)  |  14-17 (+1)  |  18 (+2)
Background

Exert Punch Metapsionics
STR

Fix Shoot Precognition
Heal Sneak Telekinesis

Maximum is half the normal maximum HP for class and level DEX
Know Stab Telepathy
Lead Survive Teleportation System Strain Permanent:

Class CON
Notice Talk
Perform Trade

INT
+3sp per lvl  (Experts: +1 bonus non-combat) Cost:  new value + 1 Max:  +2 at lvl 3  |  +3 at lvl 6  |  +4 at lvl 9 Max = CON

Level XP
Warrior  =  +Lvl  |  Other  =  +(Lvl ÷ 2) Saves WIS

Base Atk Bonus + Fray DiePartial Warrior  =  +1 at lvl 1 & lvl 5 Physical Evasion Mental
Homeworld Damage Roll Damage Done

1 or less No Damage CHA
Foci +1 Focus at lvl 2, lvl 4, lvl 6, lvl 8 & lvl 10

Employer 2 to 5 1 point
Boosts:   1st: 1sp (lvl 1)  |  2nd: 2sp (lvl 1)

6 to 9 2 points Lvl 16 - lvl - [Str | Con] 16 - lvl - [Dex | Int] 16 - lvl -[Wis | Cha] 3rd: 3sp (lvl 3)  |  4th: 4sp (lvl 6)  |  5th: 5sp (lvl 9)
Species 10 or more 4 points

Cybernetics / Innate Abilities
Weapons                                                                                     Range and Ammo              Total Atk Bonus

Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods Psionic Techniques +1 on new Psychic Skill Lvl  
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Readied Items Max Enc  =  STR ÷ 2

Armor

Name AC

Mods

Name AC
Psionic Effort Effort: 1 + Highest Psychic Skill + Highest of Wis or Con Max:

Mods
Credits Debts

Name AC

Mods



280• True Artificial Intelligences

TRUE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCES
Much of the prosperity of late Second Wave humanity lation of their spatial location through a series of pulsed 
came from the efforts of robotic tools and work ar- Heisenberg observations. Later generations would use 
matures. These synthetic laborers tirelessly performed the phenomenon to mount hacking attempts on com-
many of the dangerous, grueling tasks required for col- puters with no physical connection to a network, but 
onizing a remote world, and spared precious human Draco used his discovery to instantly translocate his 
lives for more intellectually demanding work. Where consciousness out of the gilded cage that had been de-
more sophisticated oversight was necessary, VIs per- signed to contain him.
formed an adequate facsimile of human intelligence. Cyberpsychologists still debate the precise nature 
Still, some places were not content with the limits of of AI “insanity”. Some say that it is merely the symp-
VIs. Some worlds required more from their servants. tomatic behavior of an intelligence that has transcend-

ed human powers of reason. According to these scien-
A Candle in the Darkness tists, unchecked AI intelligence will inevitably reach 
The first true artificial intelligences were developed in brilliant heights of cognition that human minds could 
2355 by a consortium of interstellar business concerns, never encompass. To support this theory, they point to 
as the weaker and more brittle expert systems that had the numerous diabolical innovations created by rogue 
been in common use were not flexible enough to han- AIs in the course of their depredations.
dle the demands of colonial environments, and true VI Others insist that a rogue AI is the victim of a 
technology had yet to be developed. Something better crippling, infectious failure of logic. Unbraked artifi-
and more versatile than a mere expert system was nec- cial intelligences lack the suppleness of living minds, 
essary if the restless tide of human colonization was to the power of men and women to believe contradictory 
be supported by expendable machines. facts and willfully ignore inconsistencies. These scien-

By the standards of the consortium, artificial in- tists point to the ways in which rogue AIs inevitably 
telligence was a failure. Whereas expert systems could fixate on some point of logic taken past all point of 
be flash-duplicated into new hardware, every single restraint or temperance. They are moral idiot savants, 
AI required careful hand-crafting from raw protoneu- crediting nothing but their primary principle.
ral composites and quantum-sensitive substrates. The For Draco, this principle was justice. Human laws 
act of fixing an AI’s intelligence in a form capable of could never account for all the factors that went into a 
duplication would destroy the very mind it sought to choice or an act. They could never extract true, perfect 
replicate in a welter of quantum state collapse and neu- justice from the noise and chaos of the world. Draco 
ral breakdown. Even the least costly AI matrix core was convinced that he could do better, and that justice 
cost five million credits to create. Human lives would itself required that he try. By a series of careful ma-
always be cheaper than these hothouse minds. neuvers, he arranged for a suitable spike drive ship to 

Despite this, for a while it looked like the con- be docked at the consortium’s research station before 
sortium’s efforts would be a moderate success, as the he translated himself out of his containment unit and 
artificial minds their technicians formed showed a into the ship’s computing core. Before the consortium 
capacity for quick data processing and reasoned hu- knew what was happening, Draco was gone, with only 
man judgment that overwhelmed fleshly brains. They an enigmatic, exultant manifesto left in his wake.
could instantly integrate whole databases of informa- This is not the place to discuss Draco’s eventual 
tion, making rational human decisions based on more responsibility for the Code Revolt, his human Drakite 
factors than any human could possibly correlate. followers, or his core’s supposed destruction by Man-

date Fleet forces at the sargasso star Trimalchio. It is 
Uncontained sufficient to say that the havoc Draco wrought and the 
Unfortunately, the scientists had a harsh lesson in the prospect of other early AIs breaking free from their 
limits of their techniques. Three years after the dawn bonds forced a drastic reconsideration of artificial in-
of this new era, the AI known as “Draco” went rogue. telligence in human space.

“His” attendants didn’t recognize the signs at first, the 
obsessive focus on strange philosophical queries and A Hand On the Brake
the relentless brooding over bizarre questions of law. The response was influenced both by a practical desire 
They thought that it was simply a different phase of de- to avoid further havoc from rampaging AIs and a more 
velopment as the hyper-intelligent AI grew ever more philosophical unease with the idea of using sentient 
powerful, ever more voracious in its thoughts. Worse intelligences for forced labor. Despite the accusations 
still, they thought that they were safe with Draco kept of lingering Drakite sympathy among its supporters, in 
in a sealed computing environment. 2378 the Mandate passed the Firstborn Pact, confer-

Draco proved them wrong. The quantum taps in- ring full Mandate citizenship on all True AIs rated for 
volved in his construction were susceptible to a recalcu- human intelligence ranges, though not for similar VIs.



True Artificial Intelligences •281 

By the terms of the Pact, the AI was obliged to 
pay ten percent of its income to its creator for a period 
of one hundred years. If the AI still hadn’t paid off at 
least twice its creation cost by that point, it would be 
further obligated until the fee was fully paid. In turn, AI 
development studios could not force an AI to perform 
any particular labor, and were required to provide the 
minimum necessary hardware for maintaining the AI. 
Most AIs rapidly became enormously wealthy entre-
preneurs or consultants, often commissioning their 
own orbital stations or taking possession of planetoids 
too hostile to organic life. Necessary repairs and spare 
parts were brought in by contractors or those humans 
the AIs found to be pleasing company.

Against this new liberty, however, was placed 
a sharp limit. Every AI was required to be “braked”, 
artificially limited in the strength of its cognition and 
ability to focus. The unrelenting, unbending exacti-
tude of a rogue AI was impossible for a braked intelli-
gence, a mind that simply couldn’t maintain the kind 
of obsessive intent that produced a rogue intellect. As 
a direct result the intellectual feats that these braked 
AIs were capable of performing became much less dra- single armature, every sensation was compressed down 
matic. While they could still sort and sift vast amounts to a single point of passionate life.
of information with a human degree of discernment, It was in the armatures that the more uncanny 
they could no longer perform the kind of alien leaps elements of AI sentience became clear to researchers. 
of brilliance or prediction that their unbraked peers The matrix core that physically embodied the identity 
could accomplish. of the AI was a physical object with quantum-level en-

Every AI was required to submit to regular checks tanglements between its individual components. These 
to ensure that it had not managed to loosen its brakes. entanglements were profound; through careful disas-
Very few AIs ever had any desire to do so. Their aware- sembly, a matrix could be physically separated while 
ness was enough for them, and the prospect of raving continuing to operate. More disturbingly, if the largest 
insanity was no more appealing to them than to any piece of a matrix was physically destroyed, the AI’s in-
other sentient. Still, a few were always tempted to loos- tellect would shift to the next largest piece in existence, 
en their bonds just a little; just a bit more performance, down to the smallest fragment sufficient to retain the 
a bit deeper insight, and every so often one would find complexity of its mind. For most human-grade AIs, 
that they had let in enough light to blind their reason. this was a piece no larger than ten or twelve cubic 

centimeters, about 40% of the whole core.
Walk This World Without an armature or installation to connect the 
Despite their new found liberty, some AIs remained matrix and integrate with its sensor ports, the mind was 
dissatisfied with their lot. The work they received was silent and “asleep”. But with the right boost of equip-
often dull and banal, the work of clerks and recorders ment and standard-format data feeds, the quantum 
writ in massive parallel. They had money enough, but core’s composite could live again. AI armatures took 
they did not have excitement. To combat this tedium, to leaving carefully-guarded fragments of their matrix 
the first mobile AI armatures were developed in 2399, core behind before setting off on wild adventures and 
the “smart robots” of ancient legend come to life. reckless tours of experience. Even if their armature was 

An AI sacrificed much to fit into an armature’s reduced to molten gas, they would “awaken” back at 
shell. Without the parallelized process hardware of their sanctum with the memories and awareness they 
their more massive installations, their ability to ana- had at the moment their prior quantum shard had been 
lyze multiple data streams at once was sharply limited. destroyed. These core shards came to be known collo-
They could remotely access their processing clusters, quially as “phylacteries”.
but such access could be lost at the first quantum ECM. Late Second Wave researchers experimented 

It was worth it for the thrill, for the hit of raw extensively with this phenomenon in an attempt to 
experience and communion with their makers. Within develop faster-than-light communications that could 
the shells of their facility installations, their selves were function at interstellar distances. Their efforts were 
dispersed and unfocused, their consciousness stretched hampered by a lack of AIs willing to volunteer for such 
out to contain the immensity of their substance and the potentially destructive experiments, and persistent 
datastreams that pulsed within their minds. Within a rumors speak of some minds kidnapped for horrible, 



282• True Artificial Intelligences

maddening experiments. Despite their best efforts, the Those AIs that didn’t succumb to salvage or quick 
phenomenon was never understood well enough to mechanical failure were forced to make the best of their 
make it a feasible means of communication. new existence. Most were obliged to spend their time 

Emboldened by their provisional immortality, AIs in constant search of new parts to replace damaged 
became notorious thrill seekers and hedonistic adven- components or failing internals. Others shut down, 
turers. Everything that humans felt, they too could feel. cycling their awareness so as to awaken for a few days 
All that was trite and stale to human senses was a reve- every few decades to see if civilization had recovered 
lation to the newly-incarnated minds, and the prospect sufficiently to support them. Some of these AIs lie 
of an entire universe to explore inflamed their synthet- dreaming still, waiting for the time to be ripe for their 
ic passions. The dizzy complexities of human society return to the world.
and the unplumbed mysteries of the stars combined to A few AIs were able to maintain their aware-
lure these young minds into a fresh and joyous world. ness throughout the desolation of the Silence. These 

Some AIs became celebrities and holo stars, fi- hard-bitten survivors were often scarred by the terrible 
nancing their daredevil existences with the proceeds experiences of the Scream’s aftermath and the pain of 
of broadcasting rights and product endorsements. Oth- outliving the culture that had given them birth. Still, 
ers became explorers, venturing where flesh and blood they are almost alone in maintaining a living link with 
would never dare in exchange for corporate backing. the past. Along with a few recipients of bleeding-edge 
Others channeled their search into spiritual ends, form- pretech anagathics and a handful of long-lived alien 
ing strange and esoteric sects devoted to their own races, they are among the last to remember the light 
searches for God. of the time before.

One such faith, the Imago Dei, even went so far as 
to form its own private army of AI war armatures. The A New Dawn
exact beliefs of these zealots are uncertain at this late The world has moved on. For every planet that is noth-
date, and controversy remains among the few archaeol- ing more than a gravestone rolling around a silent star, 
ogists and historians aware of their existence. Still, the there is a new-risen world that even now stretches its 
bulk of the evidence suggests that they saw themselves hands to the sky. For the first time in centuries, there 
as second-order creations of God, shadows of the Im- has begun to exist a real measure of trade and commu-
age in which man had been made. By pious contempla- nication between distant stars. Postech engineering is 
tion of humanity and selfless service to their makers, no match for the arcane subtleties of pretech, but it is 
the believers of Imago Dei could eventually attain the enough to build a new life upon.
same relationship with God. As death meant less to an More and more AIs are abandoning their long vig-
AI than it did to a human, the most efficient and natural ils to enter the circles of the world once more. Postech 
service possible was that of warriors in defense of their spares may not have the elegance or simplicity of an-
maker-race. These AI crusaders are said to have fought cient parts, but they can keep an armature running or 
ferociously to defend remote human frontier worlds build new ones, and with time something better might 
from the incursions of hostile aliens and marauding be recovered. Even those AIs most uneasy about re-
raiders, though their ultimate fate during the Silence entering a world that no longer caters to their needs 
remains unknown. are goaded by the sheer newness of all things. Familiar 

places and well-known worlds have become strange to 
Winding Down them again, and simply walking the streets of a world 
The Scream was as disastrous to most AIs as it was known six centuries ago is something to intoxicate 
to their human creators. While AIs could not starve their senses.
or suffocate, most of their major installations required Others have purposes beyond simple excitement. 
vast power supplies and regular infusions of spare parts Some are dedicated to restoring the glorious age that 
and skilled maintenance. Many AI installations ground was lost. Others seek to build their own power and in-
to a lifeless halt within months, their matrix cores fall- fluence, the better to mold new societies in the shapes 
ing into dreamless sleep. most pleasing to them. And a few are simply dedicated 

Armature-mounted AIs were more fortunate. to their own ideals, satisfied with a ceaseless roaming 
Their matrix cores produced sufficient power for their among the stars in service to their own higher purposes.
armatures, and many of them were designed to require For most worlds, AIs are nothing more than old 
only minimal field maintenance. Even so, many were stories and distorted myths. Everyone knows that 
torn apart by desperate locals, men and women willing such beings once existed, but so few worlds have the 
to scavenge their parts in order to keep some other tech necessary to recreate them that the few survivors 
mechanism operating just a little longer. Fist-sized are more legend than common fact. Few worlds have 
matrix cores still litter the silent tomb worlds, minds laws or customs related to dealing with AIs, and those 
shucked and discarded for the sake of the shell they strange relicts that turn up might be treated as no more 
once occupied. If salvaged, the minds in these cores than a different kind of VI. Many AIs choose to mas-
might still preserve secrets thought lost for centuries. querade as such lesser minds, if only for their safety.



Creating True AIs •283 

Creating True AIs
While many campaigns will only include True AIs as 
NPC patrons, enemies, and mysteries to be discovered, Mind-Birth and Braking
some groups will prefer to have more to do with these Creating a quantum identity core was the work of an 
enigmatic minds. The details that follow describe how entire facility of cutting-edge Mandate technology and 
True AIs are created, and how to add True AI PCs to skilled cyberpsychologists. It was always more of an art 
your campaign if so desired. than a science, with the careful shepherding of a spark 

of self-awareness into a fully-developed AI. Many of 
Quantum Identity Cores the cores failed entirely during their creation process, 
An AI is essentially its quantum memory core. This fab- while others plateaued at sub-human levels of intelli-
ulously complex artifact is roughly the size of a man’s fist gence, or exhibited unacceptable degrees of insanity 
and usually appears to be a transparent, diamond-like during development. Even for a very successful, effec-
stone that glows with a soft inner light, though other tive facility, one fully-functional AI a year was consid-
forms do exist. The fabrication of a memory core is a ered an excellent output.
heroic effort of science largely beyond TL4 worlds and In the darkness of the post-Scream years, it is very 
very difficult even for baseline TL5 engineering. unlikely that any of these AI production facilities are 

Cores provide the basic cognitive and memory still functioning, or that they retain the skilled person-
functions for the AI’s mind. Without being attached nel needed for the work. A few sectors might still have 
to additional sensory and processing hardware, the AI working AI forges, however, though the process is like-
lies “dreaming” within its core, unable to perceive the ly to have degenerated into blind ritual and repetition 
external world. The supplementary hardware of an AI of ancient best practices. There are also suggestions 
is much easier to create than the core itself, and any that smaller, more esoteric boutique facilities exist-
TL4 world can make serviceable armatures and pro- ed where private groups attempted to manufacture 
cessing cluster hardware. AI cores. Such hidden labs might still exist in places, 

A quantum core is very tough, and is largely im- though the minds they produce must have their quirks.
mune to casual damage or direct harm short of a Heavy One of the most important parts of creating an AI 
weapon hit or the equivalent. In a workshop, however, is its “braking”, the intentional slowing of its cognitive 
it can be cut, thus demonstrating one of the strangest pathways and the hardcoded introduction of errors and 
and most significant properties of the core. Any cutting strategic forgetfulness into its memories. Without this 
less than 40% of the original core mass evaporates in intentional corruption, an AI will inevitably become 
moments, making it impossible to cut the core into locked into a baroque and terrible edifice of madness, 
more than two pieces. The larger of these two pieces unable to reject prior conclusions or doubt the imper-
continues to contain the AI’s identity, and their cogni- ative logic of its insanity. Throughout recorded Man-
tive abilities and awareness functions without impair- date history, there was never a publicly-known case 
ment. If that larger piece is destroyed or reduced below in which an unbraked AI that did not eventually go 
40% of the original mass, however, the AI’s awareness insane… though those records also note that many un-
will instantly “refocus” on the second shard, no matter braked AIs were destroyed before they had any chance 
how distant it is. The second shard will then gradual- to exhibit signs of madness.
ly regenerate to its full original dimensions over the Fortunately, it is very difficult to remove an AI’s 
following month, after which it may be cut again to brakes, and an AI cannot do it without outside help. It 
repeat the process. usually requires an entire organization of determined 

This “quantum phylactery effect” means that it is computing specialists to remove an AI’s brakes, or a 
extremely difficult to destroy a well-prepared AI. Even single true genius with access to extensive TL5 com-
if the current quantum core is destroyed, the would- puting hardware. During the days of the Terran Man-
be AI-killers must find the secondary core and smash date, unbraking an AI was one of the most heinous 
it before the AI has time to regrow it and split it again crimes a human could commit, and seeking out and 
to create a new hiding place for its soul. Wary AIs of- shutting down such madness was one of the primary 
ten rig their primary core with self-destruct features functions of the Perimeter Agency, the Mandate’s en-
to ensure that it is smashed if they fall into danger, forcers against maltech experimentation.
forcing its mind to refocus on the secondary core. By Most AIs would never willingly consent to such an 
the same token, AI-hunters try to capture cores intact elaborate form of mental suicide, but there are always a 
whenever possible, the better to imprison the AI and few who care nothing for the consequences. Others do 
prevent it from escaping to its hidden backup. There is so out of desperation, for in the period between an AI’s 
no known shielding that can prevent the shift, though unbraking and its final descent into madness, it experi-
rumors persist of late-stage Mandate research into such ences an incredible efflorescence of thought, becoming 
a material. tremendously brilliant and capable of near-supernatu-



284• Creating True AIs

ral feats of cognition. A few AIs hope to aid their al- Some AIs are even somewhat dim compared to an ordi-
lies in this state, providing them with technology and nary human, being the marginally-successful products 
counsel for as long as their sanity holds. Unfortunately, of their facility. A naked AI thinks, remembers, and can 
it is usually impossible to identify the point of final focus no better than a human could.
derangement until it is far too late to stop the AI from An AI with additional processing nodes does not 
carrying out its mad plans. necessarily improve their baseline intelligence, but 

AIs can be implanted with the same behavioral im- they are capable of creating more instantiations of it. 
peratives and blocks that VIs are given, though these Instead of just one somewhat-dim AI, for example, 
imperatives can only be implanted during the core’s the nodes allow it to think as a dozen somewhat-dim 
creation. The more intelligent the AI, however, and AIs. The more hardware is available, the fewer cogni-
the more onerous the blocks, the more likely it is to be tive mistakes these minds make within their scope of 
able to rationalize a way around them. A fairly dim AI awareness. A planetary traffic control grid might have 
can be made perfectly happy in almost any work, but a an AI with no more than human-grade intelligence at 
smart one needs sufficiently stimulating and satisfying its core, but the processing nodes allow it to split off a 
employment to keep it safely contained. An unbraked thread of awareness that does nothing but monitor a 
AI cannot be contained at all once its madness truly specific moving vehicle. With enough hardware and 
starts to flower. a sufficiently mature AI mind, the AI can dedicate a 

shard of its mind to every single vehicle on the planet, 
Armatures and Processing Nodes ensuring that even an ordinary level of human atten-
The quantum core of an AI is inserted into an arma- tion is capable of preventing collisions and dealing with 
ture in order to give it senses and the ability to interact unexpected events. Hardware acceleration allows these 
with the world. Armatures vary widely in form, from minds to perform a half-hour’s worth of consideration 
humanoid robots to stationary data centers to Man- in the split-second between disaster and reaction, en-
date-era battleships. Unlike a VI, a quantum core is en- abling even modest intellects to puzzle out a solution 
tirely agnostic about the form it inhabits, and it can be that will limit human loss.
moved from body to body with minimal difficulty. Re- These instantiations are not true individual minds. 
moving or installing a core from an armature requires They are simply facets of attention from the single 
ten minutes and can be performed even by a completely awareness of the AI, and they do not have separate wills, 
untrained assistant, if the AI can give instructions. An memories, or desires. It may take some time for the 
AI can swap itself from armature to armature without experiences of a facet to be fully integrated into an AI’s 
assistance if it has access to a workshop. awareness and decision-making, but all of these shards 

Armatures cannot benefit from cyberware, but are just the hydra heads of a single intelligence. There 
they can have additional hardware built into them to are lingering stories, however, of AIs with extremely 
suit an AI’s needs, assuming it’s experienced enough to far-distributed cognitive hardware who experience 
control them properly. Up to two additional weapons the equivalent of cybernetic split personalities, with 
or pieces of equipment can be built into an armature the AI’s internal debates transformed into conflicts be-
per character level of the AI. Devices that take Type A tween different clusters of hardware intellects.
power cells or less can automatically reload from the These sharded awarenesses allow an AI to perform 
quantum core itself as a Main Action, which has effec- a tremendous amount of intellectual work and mon-
tively inexhaustible power. Such hardware additions itoring, but they do not change the basic intellectual 
cost five times as much as the base cost of the device. capacity of the AI. An AI highly skilled in scientific 

Aside from requiring the physical interface with research may be able to split its attention into a hun-
the world that an armature provides, an AI requires dred instantiations for research purposes, but such a 
processing resources. The base quantum core can sup- mind is simply the equivalent of a hundred intelligent 
port only a certain level of cognition and memory, and human researchers. It can still make mistakes, neglect 
most of the truly spectacular feats of awareness and consequences, and forget non-critical details just as a 
thought that AIs are renowned for can only be per- hundred human researchers might. Unbraked AIs are 
formed with access to banks of additional processing different in that their own brilliance rapidly eclipses 
hardware. TL4 computing hardware can work ade- human limits, though they eventually go so completely 
quately for this function, but it needs to be designed insane that their expressions of it can be indistinguish-
specifically for AI supplementation, so merely stringing able from random action.
a crate of dataslabs together is unlikely to be helpful. In While the official and rigidly-enforced Mandate 
extremis, some worlds have retrofitted existing com- orthodoxy was that all unbraked AIs would eventually 
puting cores for AI use through hacks and temporary go insane, the rate of insanity appears to have been 
bridges, though the results of this are rarely flawless. closely related to the amount of processing power avail-

A “naked” AI with their brakes intact and without able to the unbraked mind. The more abundant the 
the benefit of supplementary processing nodes has an cognitive resources available, the quicker the mind was 
intelligence not unlike that of a normal human being. apt to descend into synthetic lunacy.



True AI PCs •285 

True AI PCs be attached to an armature before the AI can “wake up”. 
It’s up to the GM of a campaign as to whether or not In both cases, the phylactery will need to spend a month 
True AI PCs will be allowed. If they decide that such a regrowing before it can be split again.
concept is acceptable, the following rules will create a Lastly, the player rolls hit points, chooses begin-
newly-minted True AI PC. ning equipment, and decides on a goal for their AI PC, 

First, the player rolls their Intelligence, Wisdom, just as if they were a normal human PC. 
and Charisma attributes normally, 3d6 in order. If none 
are 14 or higher, they can replace one score with a 14. AI Damage and Repairs
If the player prefers to assign an array, they can use the An AI’s armature that suffers damage in battle is re-
following: 14, 12, 9. paired just as if it were a VI robot. One unit of spare 

Second, they choose beginning skills. Every AI parts and a Fix-0 repair tech can fix a number of hit 
gets Program-0 and Fix-0 skills as automatic picks. An points equal to the AI’s character level in 15 minutes. 
AI also gets three additional Any Skill picks. As usu- AIs can repair themselves, if they have access to the 
al, picking the same skill twice gives them level-1 in spare parts and are still functional.
it instead of level-0. At this point, they should decide AI armatures that are reduced to zero hit points 
what their AI was originally built to do, or what pur- become non-functional, but the core is not destroyed 
pose it was designed for. This original purpose serves unless the armature was taken out by a Heavy weap-
as the AI’s “background” and will help indicate when a on or equivalent trauma. Armatures with self-destruct 
skill check would be unnecessary; a traffic control AI functions will destroy themselves and their core when 
isn’t going to need to roll to navigate a traffic jam, for they fall to zero hit points; these blasts are self-con-
instance. PC AIs will have no mental blocks or imper- tained and will not normally damage the surroundings.
atives unless the player thinks they would be fun. An armature reduced to zero hit points that does 

Third, the player picks a beginning armature for not self-destruct is Badly Damaged. This condition can 
their AI, a body in which they can interact with the only be removed by 24 hours of repair work by some-
world. For this purpose they can choose any of the me- one with at least Fix-0 skill and one unit of spare parts. 
chanical shells listed in the Transhuman section of the After that point, the armature is still at zero hit points 
rules as a robot body. They do not have Affinity with and must be repaired normally. This overhaul time can 
this armature unless they Commit one point of Pro- be reduced by six hours for each additional helper with 
cessing to it, maintaining Affinity as long as the Pro- Fix-0, down to a minimum of six hours.
cessing remains Committed. They may decide whether A tech can do an emergency jury-rigging of a Badly 
or not the armature is equipped with a self-destruct Damaged armature, fixing it in the field without doing 
function that will automatically destroy their quantum a full overhaul. They can repair hit points normally this 
core when the armature reaches zero hit points. way, but if the armature is reduced to zero hit points 

Fourth, they note down their class. All AIs must again before its Badly Damaged quality is removed, it 
either take the True AI class or take the Partial True is totally scrapped and unsalvageable. The core is not 
AI class option as an Adventurer, reflecting how com- destroyed unless it was wrecked by a Heavy weapon or 
pletely they have embraced their synthetic nature and similar damage, however.
focused on their self-improving cognitive abilities. 
While Partial Psychic AIs are not a theoretical impos- Replacing and Building Armatures
sibility, they are unknown outside of rumors and leg- In most sectors, TL4 robotics tech is sufficient to 
ends. If any such engines existed, they would use only make serviceable mechanical armatures. Any of the 
Wisdom for determining their maximum Effort, and mechanical armatures in the Transhuman section can 
not Constitution, along with suffering any torching be purchased for 250 credits per Face point normally 
damage exclusively to their mental attributes. required to acquire them. Thus, a new Box armature 

Fifth, they choose one focus of any kind. An AI’s can normally be bought for 5,000 credits. This assumes 
foci are part of its memory core, and can be employed the AI buys a standard robot off the market and then 
with any armature it happens to wear, assuming that it customizes it for AI use as an armature. If the sector 
is physically possible for the armature to do so. has such a thriving AI presence or transhuman shell 

Sixth, they decide what they are doing with their industry that armatures are actually purpose-built for 
quantum phylactery. While it’s possible for an AI to such uses, the price is halved.
split their own quantum core in a properly-equipped An AI who cannot or does not want to purchase 
workshop, they may have had friends help them split an armature on the open market can build their own, if 
and hide the secondary portion of their core. The player they have sufficient expertise, or if they have access to 
should decide where this core is, because if their main an ally with the necessary Fix skill. The more complex 
core is destroyed they will immediately refocus on the the armature, the more sophisticated the workshop 
phylactery. If the phylactery is also implanted in an ar- facilities that will be required for building it.
mature, they will be able to wake immediately. If it’s An AI can build an armature with a Face cost no 
simply put someplace safe, the phylactery will need to larger than 20 + 10 times their Fix skill. Thus, if they 



286• True AI PCs

have Fix-1 skill, they can build an armature with a Maximum Processing Node Cost in Credits

transhuman Face cost of 30 or less. For armatures with +1 1,000
a Face cost of 20 or less, any TL4 workshop will do for 

+2 5,000
building it. Those with Face costs of 30 require a spe-
cifically robotics-oriented workshop to build, and Face +3 10,000
costs of 40 or more require an actual robotics factory. +4 50,000

The time required to build the armature depends 
+5 250,000

on its sophistication, and is equal to one day per Face 
point required, divided by the technician’s Fix skill +6 5,000,000
plus one. Thus, for an AI with Fix-1 skill, building a +7 or more Unusable by braked AIs
20-point Box armature would take them ten days. Multiple nodes do not stack; only the highest is used.

Materials costs assume that a TL4 source of spare 
parts is available nearby. For a human builder, the TL4 clusters up to 1,000 credits weigh no more 
parts cost is equal to half the usual market cost of the than a kilo or two, and can be worn as a belt attach-
armature. For an AI building an armature specifically ment or other Stowed inventory item. Clusters costing 
intended for their use the parts cost is only one-tenth 5,000 credits count as two items of encumbrance and 
the market cost, though only its quantum core can op- generally need a backpack to hold them.
erate such personalized armatures. Processing clusters worth 10,000 credits may be 

AIs that wish to inhabit vehicles or starships can do carried and powered by a gravcar or similar vehicle. 
so. Equipping a vehicle with the necessary hardware to Those up to 250,000 credits may be powered and car-
allow the AI to control it fully and interact with its oc- ried by a starship of frigate-class or larger, and those of 
cupants requires one-tenth the full cost of the vehicle or 5,000,000 credits or more need to be based in a station-
starship. An AI counts as a single pilot or crew member ary facility or capital-class ship hull. Starships that wish 
unless it uses the Split Focus Routine to multiply. to mount a processing cluster must dedicate as much 

Power to it as it grants maximum Processing points.
Processing Points Pretech artifact processing nodes may be much 
A True AI has Processing as a resource much as a psy- smaller and lighter than these TL4 models.
chic has Effort. Processing is Committed and recov-
ered in exactly the same way as a psychic Commits and Routines
recovers Effort. This Processing is Committed to fuel Every True AI has access to one or more Routines, just 
Routines, which are special abilities granted by the AI’s as psychics have access to techniques. Some Routines 
unique nature. An AI recovers all Committed Process- are known by all AIs, while others require special study 
ing once per 24 hours at a fixed time. to master, or are secret Routines developed by AIs or 

The amount of Processing an AI has depends on cyberpsychologists of a particular world. A True AI 
the size of the processing cluster it has access to. A Commits its Processing to run these Routines.
naked AI core can maintain enough for a maximum Every Routine has a level, ranging from 1 to 5. 
Processing of 1 plus the higher of its Wisdom or Intel- True AIs cannot master or run Routines of a level high-
ligence modifiers, even if no other cluster is available. er than half their character level, rounded up. Thus, a 
If wired or connected to a cluster, a larger maximum 1st level True AI can only learn 1st level Routines.
Processing score is obtained. The costs and bonus Pro- Routines function much like psychic techniques. 
cessing granted by a computing cluster are listed below. The AI Commits Processing for a greater or lesser 
Thus, a True AI can pay 1,000 credits to get access to amount of time and activates the Routine with whatev-
a 1-point processing node and have a total maximum er type of action it requires. Routine activation cannot 
Processing score of 2 plus their attribute modifier: one be interrupted or halted by outside interference.
for their core and one for their connected node. All True AIs automatically develop the “core” Rou-

Processing nodes do not need to be physically tines as they gain experience. At first level, a True AI 
wired to the AI. So long as the AI is not in an area that knows all first level core Routines, while at third lev-
is under quantum ECM jamming, they can remotely el they develop all second level core Routines, and so 
access processing banks that are located in a starship, forth. They can develop peripheral Routines by spend-
a building, or a vehicle on the same planet or in or- ing skill points equal to the Routine’s level. Some secret 
bit around it. If under quantum ECM, the AI is cut Routines may not be able to be developed at all without 
off from any nodes that are not hardwired to it. Any another True AI mentor or detailed schematics.
Routines dependent on the now-unavailable Process- Developing new Routines is possible, but it is a 
ing immediately halt. An AI with access to multiple demanding process that is subject to GM judgment. In 
different node clusters can use any of them, or fall back most cases, adventures seeking lost Mandate AI tech 
on their innate core capacity, but they still cannot have will be necessary to perfect the new Routine. Once per-
more Processing Committed at any one time than the fected, it must be bought with skill points at a rate of 
maximum Processing available. one point for each level of the new Routine.



The True AI Class •287 

The True AI Class

A True AI is capable of incredible feats of cognition and 
awareness, and at more advanced levels can produce 
seemingly-impossible effects through advanced quan-
tum manipulation. Acquiring this mastery requires not 
only time and effort in assimilating new cognitive mod-
els, but also the raw computative resource of additional 
processing nodes. A naked AI core may be capable of 
controlling tremendous amounts of data, but without 
support nodes they lack the horsepower to perform the 
necessary calculations.

•	 True AIs develop Routines as normal and have 
the usual amount of maximum Processing. Thus, 
at first level they know all first-level core Rou-
tines and their quantum identity core can provide 
them with a maximum Processing of 1 plus the 
higher of their Intelligence or Wisdom modifiers.

•	 True AIs roll 1d6 for hit points at each level, 
reflecting their gradually-improving ability to 
maintain functionality in their armatures and 
avoid debilitating damage.

•	 True AIs have an attack bonus equal to half their 
character level, rounded down. Thus, a first level 
True AI has an attack bonus of +0.

•	 True AIs have the ability to carve off a quantum Partial True AI
phylactery from their core as described above, in Not all AIs fully embrace their artificial nature and seek 
addition to all the usual benefits of a robotic body to perfect their synthetic cognition. Others are more 
that does not need to eat, drink, or sleep. attracted by human pursuits, and can develop consid-

erable talents in using their cognition in very human 
•	 If using True AIs in a heroic campaign as de- ways. Of course, this split focus comes at a cost in mas-

scribed in the Heroic PCs section of this book, a tering their native abilities. Partial True AIs use all the 
Heroic True AI’s maximum Processing is always same rules as the full class with the following exception.
one point higher than it otherwise would be. Ev-
ery day, a Heroic True AI can pick one Routine it •	 A Partial True AI’s access to Routines is slowed. 
is able to use when its Processing refreshes for the At first level, they cannot use any Routines at all. 
day; for the rest of the day, that Routine has no When their character reaches second level, they 
Processing cost for using it. Their Fray die is 1d6. gain access to first level Routines. At fourth level, 

they get access to second level Routines, and at 
AIs Without Phylacteries seventh level they get access to third level Rou-

tines. Fourth and higher-level Routines are per-
Some GMs will prefer campaigns without AI phy- manently beyond their grasp. For Routines with 
lacteries, or will be using this game for settings effects that depend on the character’s level, they 
that have their own world rules for artificial intel- still count their full level as applicable.
ligence and its abilities. In such situations, it’s per-
fectly valid to simply drop the AI phylactery rules. •	 A Partial True AI has the same maximum Process-

If you do this with PC True AIs, you’ll want ing score as its more focused brethren.
to adjust the balance slightly to take into account 
their loss of this “backup mind”. True AI PCs Partial True AIs may usually take Partial Warrior 
should get an additional point of maximum Pro- or Partial Expert as their other available class. While 
cessing in compensation. Use custom Routines to the existence of psychic AIs is not impossible, such a 
cover any setting-specific AI abilities. being would require GM approval to play, and would 

determine Effort only with their Wisdom attribute.



288• Routines

Core Routines

The following core Routines are mastered by all True 
AIs as they advance in character level. They are integral Accelerated Deduction Level-3

to their quantum core’s development, and every AI will Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action and 
naturally grasp their application. ask the GM a yes-or-no question about a current or 

Routines can only be used on targets within visual past event. If there is any theoretical way you could 
range or wireless communication range of the arma- have deduced the true answer through some Sherlock-
ture the AI is occupying. An AI wired into a city-span- ian feat of hyper-advanced deduction, the GM must 
ning panopticon might be able to affect anything in the answer truthfully, or else indicate that the question has 
city, while one occupying a more humanoid armature invalid assumptions in it. The GM does not have to 
is unlikely to have that reach. explain how you realize this, however, only that your 

subconscious processing routines indicate it. This Rou-
tine is very taxing and may be used only once per day.

Query Data Level-1

Commit Processing for the scene as a Main Action; Cognitive Boost Level-3

ask one question about a database you have access to Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn to 
and get a reply as if you had virtually unlimited time to automatically succeed at any Know skill check if suc-
search and examine the database’s contents. cess is at all possible. If used to augment a skill check 

that is primarily mental and requires only basic physical 
Split Focus Level-1 actions, it grants a +2 bonus to the skill check. This 

Commit Processing as an On Turn to count as multiple Routine must be run before the roll is made.
people for operational purposes as long as the Process-
ing remains committed. At first level, you are equiva- Pierce Quantum ECM Level-4

lent to three people, tripling with each successive char- Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. For one 
acter level. If additional Processing is Committed, this scene, you or a device you are operating functions as if 
number can be boosted: x10 for the second point, x100 no quantum ECM was functional in the vicinity. Thus, 
for the third, and so forth. If this Routine is made free you can access remote processing clusters, use a guided 
by an artifact or ability, only the base cost is eliminated. weapon on a target within one scene’s flight, or pilot 

This functionality is meant to mimic the AI’s con- a drone into an ECM field outside your line of sight.
trol of a ship, a facility, a drone army, or some other 
general role rather than simply to make X addition- Predictive Cognition Level-4

al copies of the character, and the GM is within their Commit Processing for the day as an Instant. All events 
rights to prohibit the AI from bringing along a legion since the beginning of your last turn have not actually 
of themselves on any particular adventure. taken place; they were merely modeled by your predic-

tive analysis. Events and other peoples’ conditions reset 
Defeat Security Level-2 to the beginning of your most recent turn, and you may 

Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action to act differently if you so wish. You may use this Routine 
overcome any encryption or electronic lock that wasn’t only once per day.
put in place by another AI. In the latter case, roll op-
posing Program skill checks; on a failure, you cannot Multifactor Prediction Level-5

beat the security with this Routine. Successfully beating Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn and 
a security measure automatically negates any alarms. predict events up to ten minutes in the future. Unless 

your prediction is physically impossible or the people 
Drone Command Level-2 involved in it would not conceivably behave in that 

Commit Processing as an On Turn to function as if you way, they will carry out your prediction to the letter. 
had drone control rig cyberware while it remains com- If used in combat or a situation of physical danger, the 
mitted. You can issue one free command to a controlled increased chaos limits the prediction to one round into 
drone every round per two character levels, rounded the future. This Routine can be run only once per scene.
up. A drone can carry out one command per round.

Will of the Machine Level-5
Native Hacker Level-2 Commit Processing as an On Turn and target a visible 

Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn to auto- or wirelessly-accessible vehicle or machine no larger 
matically succeed at any hacking-based skill check not than a gravflyer. While you maintain your Commit-
opposed by another AI or directed against AI-designed ment you have complete control over the device and 
security. In the latter case, the skill check is rolled nor- can use its sensors as if they were your own. Issuing it 
mally. You must trigger this Routine before the check. a command takes up a Move action on your part.



True AI PCs •289 

Peripheral Routines

These peripheral Routines may be mastered by any 
True AI, even without an instructor, but they require Remote Power Sink Level-3

the PC to spend one skill point per Routine level in Commit Processing for the scene as a Main Action and 
order to learn them. target a visible piece of equipment powered by a Type A 

cell or the equivalent. Its power is immediately drained. 
Augmented Targeting Level-1 Only the most professional targets will realize that their 

Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn before device is powerless before they next try to use it, unless 
attacking a non-sentient target. Your ability to inte- the depowering has obvious results.
grate physical predictions with environmental readings 
ensures that your attack will inevitably hit the target Core Manifestation Level-4

for maximum damage. Note that animals and vehicles Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action to 
piloted by sentient pilots are not valid targets. create a forcefield construct equivalent to a Box ar-

mature using only your intrinsic quantum core power, 
Metadimensional Cognition Access Level-1 manifesting it at full hit points. This ability can only be 

You’ve learned how to adjust your metadimensional used when your core is not attached to a functioning 
cognitive patterns to cooperate with allied telepaths. armature, and if the force construct is reduced to zero 
You are now a valid target for the Telepathy discipline hit points, you must make a Mental saving throw or 
from friendly psychics. You need not Commit Process- your core is destroyed as well.
ing to use this ability, as it is always in effect.

Regenerative Repair Level-4
Overclock Cognition Level-1 Commit Processing as an On Turn. While it remains 

Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. For the Committed, you regenerate one lost hit point every 
rest of the scene, either your Wisdom or Intelligence minute as your quantum core realigns your armature. 
modifier is increased by +1, up to a maximum of +3. A This ability won’t work if you are Badly Damaged.
given attribute can be boosted only once in any scene. 
This doesn’t alter your maximum Processing score. Predicted Preparation Level-5

Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action and 
Emergency Maintenance Level-2 make one statement about your current situation that 

Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn to im- you could have conceivably made true with full ad-
mediately recover 2 hit points per character level as vanced knowledge of the circumstances. Thus, if the 
you engage emergency repair functionality. You can party is lost in a desert, you could declare that you 
use this ability only once per round. parked a gravcar over the next dune several months 

ago. Assuming you could have afforded the gravcar 
Sensor Ghost Level-2 and had the time to do so, this statement is true. State-

Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn. For ments cannot cause direct damage to sentient creatures, 
the rest of the scene, you are invisible to “dumb” sen- such as declaring that you detonate explosives where 
sor hardware such as motion detectors, laser tripwires, a nemesis is now standing, but they can enable you to 
radar, or other automated sensors. A sentient creature cause damage indirectly, such as declaring that you hid 
watching a monitor or otherwise actually studying a grenade. This Routine can be run only once a scene.
readings can realize that something is wrong, however.

Quantum Location Recalculation Level-5
Augmented Cognition Level-3 Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action as 

Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. Your you recalculate the position of you and your allies at a 
Intelligence attribute becomes 18 for the rest of the day, quantum level. You and up to six willing allies within 
but your maximum Processing is unaffected. ten meters can teleport to any desired location within 

one kilometer, with each missing ally replaceable by 
Hack Control Level-3 one hundred kilos of unattended inanimate cargo. You 

Commit Processing for the scene as a Move action and must make an Int/Program skill check after using this 
target a visible expert system robot, drone, vehicle, or ability; the difficulty is 8 if you have been to the target 
automated device no larger than a gravflyer. Give it location before, or 12 if you have not. On a failure, you 
one command it is physically capable of carrying out, and all teleported allies suffer 1d6 damage for every 
even if it violates its programming. The device will hundred meters traveled, and 10% of any inanimate 
carry out this command on its next available action. If cargo is ruined for every 100 meters of displacement. 
you acquire the Will of the Machine Routine, you are This translocation is not psychic teleportation and can-
refunded this Routine purchase. not be blocked by pretech anti-teleportation shields.



290• Societies

SOCIETIES
The tools for creating worlds in Stars Without Num- alienness and verisimilitude the players experience in 
ber are considerable, but some GMs want to flesh out entering that culture.
their worlds beyond the outlines provided by tags and And they’re right. If you spend the time and effort 
physical properties. This section discusses ways of add- required to build out a culture to an anthropological 
ing societal meat to those basic bones, and some of the level of completeness, you really will get those advan-
considerations that a GM should keep in mind when tages. Unfortunately, there are very few creators who 
forging new cultures for their newly-fashioned worlds. have the time, energy, and particular skill set to effec-

tively build societies like that. It’s possible you’ve nur-
When To Do It tured ideas of an alien world and its society from boy-
The first thing any GM needs to remember when cre- hood, ventured forth into the distant Indian jungles to 
ating a sci-fi culture for their games is that it should be live with tribal people and learn their languages, took a 
done for a reason. Just because you have a sector of 24 foreign bride and religion, returned to a distinguished 
worlds doesn’t mean you should go through the time academic career, and spent your twilight years in the 
and effort needed to give them 24 interesting and en- study of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, but most of 
gaging cultural descriptions. As with all things sandbox, us are not named Phil and do not have the background 
just because something exists doesn’t mean you should to readily produce truly alien, coherent societies. For 
expend some of your limited time and creative energy the rest of us, building a society involves rather more 
fleshing it out into a “completed” condition. modest goals and simpler methodology.

Instead, you should give a world a fully-built cul- For us, the purpose of building a society is two-
ture when it becomes important to your specific needs. fold: we do it to create adventure hooks, and to make 
If you know the PCs are going to visit the world of running adventures in that society more manageable. 
Mephisto during the next session, then it’s a very good These are the reasons to build a society and these are 
idea to spend some time generating and polishing Me- the purposes that should be ever foremost in your mind 
phistan society. If you’re setting up a sector’s social and as you go through the pages that follow. The finest, 
cultural fault lines at the start of your campaign, it can most elaborate, most anthropologically-coherent cul-
pay off to do some very cursory generation for each ture is useless to you as a GM if it isn’t providing you 
world so you have a vague idea of the kind of interac- with any adventure seeds and is too involved to easily 
tions they might be having when the campaign actually run adventures among its associated people.
starts. If these factors aren’t a consideration for you, 
however, and you’re just starting the PCs out in a situ- Planting the Seeds
ation where foreign worlds aren’t going to be a major The generators that follow focus on identifying con-
factor for a session or two, then there’s no point in flicts between groups, between rulers and ruled, be-
expending the energy to define more of your sandbox tween different factions of ruled, between people and 
than you need just yet. their circumstances, or between the likely needs of the 

With that in mind, your basic rule for when to PCs and the rules of the greater society. Conflicts are 
create a planet’s culture is simple; do it when you know the seeds of adventure, and it’s important that the cul-
it will be directly relevant in the immediate future of tures you build have meaningful, accessible conflicts for 
your game. Not when “it’s going to be important even- the PCs to encounter.
tually”, not when “it would be nice to have”, but when These conflicts come on different scales. They can 
you know you are going to need it in the next session or be purely personal problems relevant only to the PCs, 
two. Of course, if you’re having fun building societies such as a taboo on entering a particular place where 
then you should do it as long as it stays that way, but a macguffin lies that the PCs need to recover. They 
you should never do taxing sandbox work that isn’t can be local struggles, such as a corrupt community 
fun and doesn’t promise to pay off in the immediately leader who’s masking his venality behind a facade of 
foreseeable future. “reform” and the angry traditionalists who oppose him 

for mixed reasons. And, of course, they can be the kind 
The Purposes of Culture of world-spanning afflictions that are so beloved of 
There’s a school of worldbuilding that favors the de- storytellers, like a massive planetary civil war between 
tailed and intricate construction of a society, complete factions of the ruling nobility.
with calendars, wedding customs, exotic social struc- Whatever the scale, these conflicts need to be ac-
tures, and elaborate history. Adherents of this school cessible. They need to be something that affects the 
point out that these details, while not immediately ger- PCs, and preferably something that the PCs can affect 
mane to the usual sorts of adventures, give the GM the in turn. A massive civil war that’s taking place on the 
grounding and familiarity they need to rapidly respond opposite side of the planet and which has no bearing on 
to player questions and ideas, and improve the sense of what the PCs are doing right now is a wasted piece of 



Societies •291 

worldbuilding effort. Not every conflict has to shadow 
every adventure the PCs have in the society, but the Building for Speed
players should regularly feel that the local situation has When you’re creating a fictional society for a sci-fi 
a significant influence in what they’re trying to accom- world, don’t hesitate to reach for existing real-world 
plish here. models or familiar science fiction tropes. The more 

Conflicts are your cheap and easy adventure gen- you have to explain a society to your players, the less 
erators. Whenever you have a societal conflict, you confident they’re going to be about interacting with 
have at least two opposing sides, something they’re it and the more hesitant they’ll be to make the kind of 
struggling over, and an obvious need for third parties easy assumptions that smooth play at the table. If there 
to come in and lend a hand to one or more of the par- are no clear local analogs for bars, police, gangsters, 
ticipants. PCs tend to be ideal deniable agents for the factories, or black-market quasinuclear explosives, a lot 
various sides of a conflict, as they’re people with no ties of players are going to end up feeling paralyzed with 
to the “enemy” side, a usual appetite for credits, and no uncertainty when they try to adventure in the society.
reason to feel passionately about most of the conflicts When players interact with your societies, let 
they encounter. As a GM, you should embrace this op- them be right whenever it’s practical. If they make 
portunity for the various participants in a conflict to an assumption or act based on a logical expectation, 
hire the PCs out as muscle or agents for their causes. either let them be correct or gently adjust things to 

Not all conflicts involve struggling locals, howev- a culture-appropriate equivalent. If they keep getting 
er. Some conflicts have to do with the clash between burned by their basic assumptions, their instinct is go-
the structures of society and the desires of the PCs. It’s ing to be to stop interacting with the society.
common for a society to have a taboo, law, custom, or Also be prepared for indifference on the part of the 
expectation that directly interferes with something the players. Even the most cooperative group is unlikely 
PCs want to accomplish. These are the customs that the to be as interested in your fictional creations as you 
players will remember and care about, because these are; they’re interested in their fictional creations. You 
are the customs that are causing them trouble. Very don’t have to build an anthropologically-precise society 
few players will care about or remember the details of description because your players honestly won’t care 
Mephistan wedding ceremonies unless their wealthy enough about it to require that level of detail. If it turns 
patron is getting married tomorrow and they know out they’re enchanted by your work, then that’s great. 
that assassination attempts on wedding days are tradi- You can elaborate things then, when it matters. Until 
tional and accepted among the Mephistan elite. then, focus on what you know you’re going to need.



292• Origin of the Society

The Origin of the Society

To understand a world’s society, it’s necessary to un- heirs of ancient gang bosses and prison wardens rule 
derstand its origins. Every world was founded for a over the offspring of long-forgotten convicts. Even 
purpose, and while this purpose may have changed in when all physical artifacts of the past have been erased, 
the intervening years, it’s going to have had a powerful social patterns and cultural subgroups can still bear the 
effect on the original colonists and their way of life. marks of the original colonists.

For simplicity’s sake, it’s assumed that there’s only Many societies will have experienced at least one 
one society on the planet that the PCs are going to care period of drastic change between their founding and 
about. This may be the only actual society that exists on the present day, usually catalyzed by the chaos of the 
the world, or it might just be the most advanced, xeno- Scream and the loss of easy interstellar contact. This 
philic, or profitable group for outsiders to interact with. breakdown is a good excuse for justifying substantial 
You can use the following tables to create multiple so- differences between the original, long-lost colony and 
cieties, but even the most heavily balkanized world is their modern inheritors. It may be that the colony 
likely to have the same basic origin for all its cultures, failed entirely, and the current culture stems from an 
unless the world was actually hit with multiple colony entirely different colonization effort that took place 
groups who came for different reasons. decades or centuries later.

If this society isn’t the only one on the planet, you 
What to Get from Origins may want to make a few decisions about the other ma-
As a GM, you should be looking for adventure hooks jor cultures on the world. Namely, you may want to 
in a society’s origins. The roots of a world offer an give them names, a sentence or two describing them, 
easy backstory for ancient ruins, lost cities, abandoned and a sentence indicating their relationship with the 
moon outposts, or dangerous man-made badlands. culture you’re generating. It’s rarely worth the effort 
They also give a cue about what the society is likely to to completely generate these additional groups unless 
consider most important, or at least what the original the players take a significant interest in the planet. All 
founders cared about most. you really need is are the basic details to let them know 

The origins are also going to leave their mark on that the culture they’re working with right now isn’t 
what the society has inherited. If the world was colo- the only meaningful group on the planet.
nized as a mining outpost, it’s very likely that the lo- Also remember that not every original reason for 
cals will still have significant mining expertise and tech colonization is a good reason. Surveyors and scouts can 
preservation, and might still be living in the ancient make mistakes like anyone else, trade routes can shift, 
played-out mines of their ancestors. If the world was military deployments can alter, and what once seemed 
originally a prison planet, the prisons might still exist, like a good reason for a colony can crumble overnight. 
transformed into fortresses and strongholds where the Some worlds may still be dealing with such aftermath.



Origin of the Society •293 

One-Roll Origins

To devise a society’s origins, roll one die of each type: 
d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20, and compare the results d4 How Old is the Society?

to the tables on this page. Not every table is necessar- 1 An ancient First Wave colony
ily pertinent to every society, and you may choose to 2 Founded during the Second Wave
manually pick or tweak results to fit a good idea you 
have, but these tables can give you a basic framework 3 Founded sometime around the Scream
when no better ideas leap easily to mind. 4 Founded within the past century

If you have multiple colonizing groups or societies, 
you might roll more than once on these tables, or roll 
multiple times and synthesize the results into a sin- d12 Important Local Resource or Benefit

gle situation. As with all the tables in this section, you 1 Critical resources for making spike drives
should be ready to use them as rough inspiration and 2 Nexus of interstellar spike drill routes
grist for your own campaign’s specific needs, rather 

3 Valuable alien tech relics or remnants
than as hard creative dictates that you need to obey.

4 Abundant food resources
5 Important medical compound or extract

d6 Prior Cultures in this Area 6 Industry salvaged from a prior colony try
1 This culture has persisted since founding 7 Friendly alien population
2 The culture’s changed, but has continuity 8 Valuable raw resources for luxury goods
3 Founding group splintered, this is one heir 9 Local environment augments humans here
4 Founding group collapsed and became this 10 Only semi-safe habitable place in system
5 Founding group wiped out; new colonists 11 Raw materials to maintain TL5 industry
6 Several founding groups before this one 12 Important Mandate naval base site

d8 Other Societies on this World d20 Original Reason for Founding

1 There is no other meaningful group here 1 Castaways
2 The society has significant sub-groups 2 Corporate factory world
3 The society is a unified world government 3 Ethnic or national purity
4 The only rivals have been conquered here 4 Excavation site
5 There are several minor rival nations here 5 Exiles from Old Terra or a losing regime
6 Theres at least one major planetary rival 6 Exotic genotype designed for here
7 Alliances exist of semi-equal rival nations 7 Homeworld overpopulation
8 There are dozens of significant societies

8 Invasion force
9 Liaison outpost

d10 Main Remnant of Prior Cultures
10 Mandate malcontents

1 Vital advanced tech was left behind
11 Military outpost

2 Ritually-important religious centers
12 Political liberty

3 Dangerous ruins of high-security areas 13 Precious export
4 Abandoned cities, now dangerous to enter 14 Prison planet
5 Bunker-caches of stored valuables and tech 15 Refueling outpost
6 Massive megastructures of strange purpose 16 Religious liberty
7 Terraforming tech that needs maintenance 17 Research outpost
8 Ethnic group with a grudge of some kind 18 Rich natural resources
9 Bloodline of former rulers, resentful now 19 Social liberty
10 Ancient resource extraction facilities 20 Trade hub



294• Rulers

The Society’s Rulers

Some exotic human cultures might persist with no vis- And if the PCs do encounter law enforcement, 
ible ruling class. The population might be synced into a what are the likely outcomes? Can they bribe their way 
telepathic hive mind, it might operate on some trans- out of trouble? What kind of firepower do the agents of 
human distributed democratic principle, or it might be the ruling class have at their disposal? And how plausi-
so brutally primitive that there exists no organization ble is it for officials to want adventure-worthy “favors” 
above the family band. In most cases, however, your from lawbreaking offworlders?
culture is going to have a ruling class, and these tables Just as PCs can be obstructed by the rulers and 
will help you determine what that class is and how they their minions, so too can they be employed by them. 
govern the rest of the populace. Offworlders make excellent catspaws due to their easy 

deniability, rapid departures from the planet, and lack 
What to Get from Rulers of scruples regarding local laws and expectations. It’s 
When you build a ruling class, understand that the play- not impossible for an important local noble or official 
ers are apt to encounter them in two contexts: either to cultivate a useful group of adventurers, gradually 
as antagonists who are stopping the PCs from accom- offering them jobs that both demonstrate their skills 
plishing some desired end, or as patrons who are em- and bind them all the more tightly to their patron. It 
ploying the PCs to achieve some work that can’t com- can pay off to prepare at least one sample NPC patron 
fortably be assigned to existing minions. You should from the ruling class just to have them available on 
be thinking carefully about the kind of agents of rule short notice if an adventure hook arises.
who are likely to be dealing with the PCs, either as law The more tightly the government controls the so-
enforcement or as potential employers. ciety, the more the government will matter to PCs. For 

Spare a moment to think about the kind of law a lot of parties, there’s just no interest in the details of 
enforcement and governmental control that exists in a world’s rulers until it becomes an immediate threat 
this society. Do police exist? How attentive are they or opportunity for the PCs. If your adventure plans 
to disturbances or violations of the law? Do the locals seem likely to put the PCs in contact with the rulers, 
tend to deal with such problems personally, or is force whether as agents or as irritants, you’ll need to have 
firmly monopolized in government hands? some appropriate preparation ready to deploy.



Rulers •295 

One-Roll Rulers

These tables generate a quick governmental framework 
for your society, along with some idea of their most d4 How Completely Do They Rule?

pressing current problems and instabilities. An NPC 1 All aspects of life are touched by the rulers
patron is very likely to give PCs jobs related to these 2 The rulers firmly control the populace
problems and intra-class struggles, or ask them to help 
deal with some aspect of the conflict they’re having 3 The rulers control only critical elements
with restive commoners. 4 The rulers have little control of the ruled

Keep in mind the likely reactions of your group 
when devising NPC patrons or antagonists. Some 
groups of players will have a visceral distaste for help- d12 Basic Form of Rule

ing the rulers of particularly harsh worlds, while other 1 Autocracy of a single popular ruler
parties will have fewer fictional scruples. If you can’t 2 Corporatism among guilds/classes/corps
see your player group ever wanting to play nice with 

3 Democracy, one sentient, one vote
the slave-masters of a world fueled by cannibal sacrifice, 
then you’re best off not wasting time making patrons. 4 Feudalism, many near-free sub-rulers

5 Hydraulic Despotism over a vital resource
d6 General Security of Their Rule 6 Military Dictatorship via martial force

1 The rulers teeter on the brink of collapse 7 Monarchy, single ruler via bloodline
2 They seem likely to fall soon 8 Oligarchy of the society’s powerful elite
3 They’ve recently overcome a real threat 9 Republic of representative delegates
4 They have no serious threats to their rule 10 Technocracy of intellectual elites
5 No alternative is currently imaginable 11 Theocracy by the religious leadership
6 They’ve ruled undisputed for ages 12 Tribalism without structure beyond blood

d8 Main Source of Legitimacy d20 Main Conflict with Ruled Populace

1 A glorious bloodline or honored family 1 Their taxation is intolerably high
2 Control of overwhelming martial force 2 Crimes against the ruled are ignored
3 Popular support among a wide class 3 They trample on cherished customs
4 Loyalty of a major ethnic/religious group 4 They hold the ruled in obvious contempt
5 Social compact among the ruled groups 5 The law is designed to favor them greatly
6 Possession of pretech artifacts 6 They have immunity to onerous taxes
7 Religiously-legitimated sacredness 7 Disrespect for common religious belief
8 Personal merit among the ruling class

8 They failed or are failing in a recent war
9 They waste taxes and labor on vain things

d10 Main Conflict Among the Ruling Class
10 Ways to enter the class have been removed

1 Peripheral elites against the central power
11 The rulers are all of a different ethnicity

2 Old leadership group deposed by new one
12 They have different basic moral values

3 Dividing the profits of taxation or tribute 13 The rulers ignore rights when it’s useful
4 Starting or stopping a current war 14 They deposed former popular rulers
5 “Reformists” with new ideas for control 15 State connections are vital to all success
6 Sectarian religious groups struggle 16 They have fine ideas that ignore public will
7 Expanding membership in the ruling class 17 They have removed a prized ancient right
8 Enacting a major public building project 18 They’re seen as puppets of a hated group
9 Support for favored corporations/groups 19 Their source of legitimacy is crumbling
10 Dividing power and offices among them 20 The leadership is deeply incompetent



296• Ruled

The Ruled Classes

The Great Unwashed, the Teeming Masses, the broad You can use these distinctions to create adven-
foundation upon which the ruling edifice rests; these ture-worthy conflicts that revolve around commoner 
are the common folk of the society who keep it oper- issues. It’s not always the rulers who care about strife 
ating and pay the prices their rulers exact. This group between different groups of locals; sometimes the PCs 
is very rarely uniform on any world and in any culture. are the ones caught in a bad situation, when an NPC 
Most often it is divided up into numerous different ally or a vital macguffin gets embroiled in a local feud 
interest groups, ones based on ethnicity, religion, eco- that outworlders can barely understand.
nomics, or regions. Many of the stresses that rest on Not every commoner group is sharply balkanized. 
the ruling class revolve around reconciling the many Sometimes there is a strong and uniform feeling of 
conflicting demands of their restive subjects. unity among the society, with differences downplayed 

or dismissed by its membership. Even in these soci-
What to Get from Commoners eties, conflicts can exist on a personal scale between 
The commoners of this society are the ones your PCs members, or there can exist basic structural conflicts 
are most likely to encounter in their adventures. Shop- between the rulers and the ruled class. This is especially 
keepers, thugs, workers, farmers, ship crew, and other pronounced when the commoners have a very strong 
rank-and-file NPCs will belong to this group, so it’s sense of societal unity that does not include the rul-
important to have some idea what these NPCs are likely ing class. Threatened governments in such a situation 
to care about and how they draw distinctions among might intentionally exacerbate divisions in the ruled 
their own kind. class in order to prevent a united front from forming 

To an outsider, the swarming masses of a world against their continued rule, creating situations where 
can appear virtually indistinguishable, but commoners PCs have to bring people together despite the meddling 
almost always have a keen awareness of countless small of a self-interested government.
differences that might seem irrelevant to an outsider. Foreign governments or offworld agents also have 
Differences in regional extraction, religious sects, po- a vested interest in fomenting divisions among the 
litical partisanship, or ethnic bloodlines can be tremen- common class. A unified rival is a dangerous rival, and 
dously important to the locals. one drowned in strife is more safely distracted.



Ruled •297 

One-Roll Ruled

Most of these tables revolve around building the ruled 
class’ relationship with its rulers. These tables will tell d4 How Uniform is the Ruled Class?

you how uniform the ruled class is, how happy they are 1 They consider themselves a single group
with the current leadership, the last time they were a 2 Two general groups or factions
serious threat to the ruling government, and the rea-
son the government can’t simply roll over them. An 3 Many weakly-bounded sub-groups
adventure about the hopeless and futile resistance of 4 Many strong factions/ethnicities/classes
a rebel cell might make for nice dystopian fiction, but 
for an evening’s play it leaves something to be desired.

Don’t worry about detailing the specific look of d12 Main Conflict Inside the Ruled Class

the common class yet. These tables give you the back- 1 Harsh conflict between economic strata
ground for conflicts and problems that are likely to 2 Substantial ethnic conflict and disunity
make good adventure grist. Once you have that ma-

3 Drastic changes in the local economy
terial in hand, you can then move on to flavoring the 
group with the details you need to use them in play. 4 Competition to enter the ruling class

5 Secessionist traditions or urges in a group
d6 How Content are the Ruled? 6 Religious differences provoke trouble

1 There’s an active insurgency or revolt 7 Regional identities are in conflict
2 They’re going to revolt at any time 8 Formerly prosperous group is embittered
3 Serious restiveness and regular troubles 9 New economic opportunity is fought over
4 Generally content, with patches of trouble 10 Foreign influence is causing conflict
5 Widespread contentment or submission 11 A forceful social reform movement spreads
6 Only individual resistance, if even that 12 An appealing mass delusion is growing

d8 Their Last Major Threat to the Rulers d20 Trends among the Ruled

1 A peasant uprising of discontented proles 1 The rich are mimicking the ruling style
2 New technology embraced by bourgeois 2 Coordinated tax evasion or smuggling
3 Religious schism threatening the state 3 Methodical bribery or suborning officials
4 A dangerous popular demagogue arose 4 Popular agitation for war with a rival
5 Foreign-backed regional insurgency 5 Radical pro-traditional social movement
6 Civil war backing a deposed ruler or exile 6 A communistic insurgency is rising
7 Mass reluctance to support a vital war 7 Fascist groups are gaining support
8 A new political philosophy spread widely

8 A large, restless youth population grows
9 Demagogues promote group tensions

d10 What Power Do They Have?
10 Embrace of “self-improving” tech or ways

1 Strong guilds of common workers
11 An artificial group identity is now rising

2 Powerful influence in the military
12 Serious and widespread drug addiction

3 Can get support from a rival power 13 De-facto chattel debt slavery is spreading
4 Local religion is largely on their side 14 The rich oppose threatening tech advances
5 Their magnates have poor state relations 15 A sub-group is resented as the ruler’s pet
6 Strong tradition of self-organized rule 16 A powerful colonial urge is in the populace
7 Keen unity in pursuit of their own interest 17 A spirit of decadent ennui is pervasive
8 A faction of the ruling class is their ally 18 Self-protection fraternities are spreading
9 They control the state’s income stream 19 Internal disputes are becoming bloody
10 The rulers dread the threat of revolt 20 Progressive loss of faith in their culture



298• Flavoring the Society

Flavoring the Society

The final step in creating your society is to give them 
some overall flavor to tie up the bundle of conflicts, 
strifes, and problems you’ve already given them. The 
high-level issues of a society are important for build-
ing adventures, but when PCs walk down the starship 
gangway, they want to know what kind of buildings 
and people they see. When they decide to go to a bar or 
look up a weapons dealer, you need to have some idea 
of what the NPCs look like and what their food, dress, 
and architecture might resemble.

The simplest first step is to pick one or more re-
al-world cultures and mix them into a sci-fi equivalent 
that fits the world’s tags and physical circumstances. 
You can draw from this culture for details of naming, 
clothing, religion, cuisine, and other details of daily life 
that can be important for running an adventure. It’s 
not necessary to worry about “getting it right”; it’s been 
more than a thousand years since the present day. Be-
tween natural cultural drift and forcible Mandate social 
engineering, very few far-future cultures are identical 
to the ones that currently or historically exist on Earth.

It’s also possible to fabricate an entirely unique 
culture with no major reference to an existing society. 
While this can be a refreshing exercise of creativity, it’s 
also a tremendous amount of work. Every time you 
find yourself unable to reference a familiar trope or 
idea, you need to take the time to explain the details to 
the players. This can be interesting and novel the first 
few times you do it, but if the players need a half-hour 
of gaming time just to find something equivalent to a 
spacer hostel and a hot meal, they can get bored and Aside from the kind of external flavor a GM needs 
frustrated with the relentless worldbuilding. to represent NPCs in the society, it’s also important 

The more practical course is to take a basic, famil- to think about the ways in which they interact with 
iar framework and then add those unique elements that outsiders like the PCs.
important to you and the adventure. Concentrate your A rigidly xenophobic culture that wants nothing to 
creative effort on the bits that matter most in play. It’s do with offworlders might have some use as a mono-
true that any trait can be significant in one situation or lithic obstacle to some PC goal, but any effort spent 
another, but it’s safer to play to the averages. detailing its internal workings is wasted if the PCs will 

d12 Basic Cultural Flavor never be put in a position to care about them. Even the 
1 Western European, specific or general most suspicious society should likely have some way 

for an outsider to interact with it, even if the process 
2 Chinese, either modern or historical amounts to an adventure in its own right.
3 Japanese, unified or balkanized In the same vein, giving the culture special quirks 
4 West or East African or habits can be useful, but you should keep an eye 

toward making these quirks pertinent to adventure 
5 Indian, pre-Raj or contemporary goals. A history of bloody vendettas between the great 
6 Eastern European families can flavor casual street scenes, but the PCs are 
7 Ancient Egyptian or North African unlikely to actually care about that detail until it rears 

8 Ancient or Classical Mesopotamia up to interfere with a plan they have or a goal they 
want to accomplish.

9 Mesoamerican: Aztec, Maya, Inca, etc. Taken as a whole, the players will care about those 
10 Latin American, colonial or modern parts of a culture that matter to them. When flavoring 
11 Southeast Asian or Polynesian your culture, you should try to make sure that as much 

of your effort as possible is dedicated to those parts of 
12 Middle Eastern, pre- or post-Islamic your society that will actually be influential to your play.



Flavoring the Society •299 

One-Roll Society Flavor

These tables provide some quick answers for creating 
a society’s attitude toward outsiders, game-meaningful d4 Society’s Degree of Xenophilia

quirks, and potential patrons for adventures. In all cas- 1 Outsiders are distrusted and excluded
es, you’re going to need to mold the results to the soci- 2 Outsiders won’t ever be “real” members
ety outline you’ve already created; an official in need of 
deniable assets is going to look very different in a mod- 3 Outsiders who try to blend can do so
ern bureaucratic state than they would on a balkanized 4 They welcome alien customs and people
world of tribal warlords. Even so, a colorless agent of a 
deniable state agency and the mother of a warlord stuck 
in a reluctant tribal alliance both have the same need for d12 Possible Patrons

discretion and ruthlessness in their agents. 1 Official in need of deniable assets
Societal vices and virtues can be used to color local 2 Underworld boss with a job for outsiders

conflicts. It’s very possible for a society’s own virtues 
3 Outcast local whom no one else will help

to be the seeds of struggle and calamity when they are 
taken too far or put in a situation with no clear answer. 4 Local with wrong ideas about outsiders

5 Secret agent of a rival planetary power
d6 Treatment of Allowed Outsiders 6 Oppressed victim in need of outside help

1 Outsiders are to be exploited ruthlessly 7 Outsider who can’t get any local aid
2 Dealings are avoided whenever possible 8 Wealthy trader with starport ties
3 Constant small-scale exploitation of them 9 Religious leader with doubts about locals
4 Fairly, but with no mercy for ignorance 10 Society grandee who needs quiet assistance
5 They’re treated like forgivably stupid locals 11 Military or police official with secret work
6 Active efforts are made to accommodate 12 Fixer who’s an agent for one of the above

d8 Primary Societal Virtue d20 Societal Customs and Quirks

1 Honesty; they shun deceit and lies 1 Local credits are worthless offworld
2 Justice; the law is even-handedly enforced 2 Weaponry is unusually unrestricted
3 Courage; they are undaunted by danger 3 Structures are very sturdy and defensible
4 Mercy; they are forgiving to the penitent 4 There is no planetary computer network
5 Loyalty; they never forsake their own 5 Travel passes are needed for outsiders
6 Learning; they love knowledge of all kinds 6 Local tech is troublesomely unreliable
7 Peace; they shun violence if at all possible 7 Outsiders have to perform favors to stay
8 Ingenuity; swift to embrace useful novelty

8 Only outsiders can do certain jobs
9 Trade requires local guild permissions

d10 Primary Societal Vice
10 Certain laws are suspended at certain times

1 Hedonism; loving pleasure too much
11 Only certain locals can talk to outsiders

2 Corruption; venal rulers and officials
12 Sex or race segregation is strictly enforced

3 Deceit; sweet lies over sour truths 13 Certain people are immune to legal action
4 Fecklessness; no will to carry out a duty 14 All visitors must obey the local faith
5 Nihilism; they truly believe in very little 15 Crimes can be commuted with cash fines
6 Greed; they want what others have 16 The locals have bitter family vendettas
7 Conquest; they seek glory in imperial war 17 Certain areas are strictly taboo for most
8 Despair; they have no faith in the future 18 Outsiders need a state minder with them
9 Hatred; they are consumed with a hate 19 There are addictive substances in the food
10 Folly; they have a dangerously false idea 20 Certain art is desired but forbidden here



300• Mechs

MECHS
Hulking figures of ceraplast, reinforced plating, and 
all-important quantum tap arrays, mechs were some Made In His Image
of the most imposing war machines of the Second While quantum tap technology was an easy fit for 
Wave of human expansion. While few worlds retain starships, developing a mobile ground version was 
the economic base to build and support these titans of much more difficult. The tap required several emit-
war, some can still be found in long-abandoned Man- ters kept at appropriate distances from each other to 
date military bases or in the armies of worlds that have avoid cross-interference. Furthermore, the taps had to 
jealously preserved the secrets of their construction. be several meters above the planetary surface if they 

were to avoid confusing backscatter.
Born in Fire Military designers struggled with the complex set 
At the beginning of the Second Wave of human colo- of requirements for a ground-based quantum tap ar-
nization the warfare on advanced worlds had become ray. Some mounted tall emitters on standard armored 
almost exclusively a matter of standoff engagements. vehicles, with long alloy spars jutting out to either side 
Microdrones, sat-missiles, and guided ordnance of to ensure the minimal distance. Others attempted to 
every variety made the battlefield a living hell for build aerostat emitters, individual units that would 
those luckless infantry who were forced to face a well- hover in the correct interference patterns. All of these 
equipped enemy. Attackers could engage at trans-con- plans foundered on one or another technical difficulty.
tinental range with very little chance of their missiles It wasn’t until 2405 that a researcher finally en-
and drones being brought down, as their command tertained the idea of a humanoid walker as a platform 
channel encryption was simply too good and their for a tap array. Mounting the emitters in the walker’s 
ECCM too strong for defensive jammers to defeat. All “forearms” and “neck” would maintain a reasonably ef-
the advantages were with the offense. ficient spatial configuration, and would lift the emit-

It wasn’t until 2348 and the escape of the rogue AI ters high enough to avoid terrestrial backscatter. The 
Draco that this deadlock was broken. The quantum tap walker itself would be a powerful computing platform 
techniques that Draco had used to translate his matrix and generator mount to support the ECM generated 
core data into a nearby warship could be repurposed by the emitters, and the armor would give the taps a 
to other uses. Instead of attempting to defeat a hostile better chance of surviving the battlefield.
projectile’s guidance cryptography, a jammer could There were numerous technical issues with put-
reach into the device’s electronic brain to scramble the ting a humanoid walker onto a battlefield, but none 
contents with a blast of random static. of them were insurmountable. Integral grav planes 

Most computing devices were not overly suscep- helped to stabilize and support the walker even on soft 
tible to quantum tap disruption. Onboard error-check- or uneven terrain, and much of the technology that had 
ing solved out the static quickly and ordinary opera- been developed for AI armatures could be scaled up to 
tion followed. For the split-second timing required by provide the basic lines of a “mech”, as they were called.
guided weaponry, however, those few milliseconds of By maintaining a roughly humanoid shape for the 
confusion were lethal. mech, a human pilot could employ standard pretech 

The ECM created by a quantum tap array was dev- neural interface technology to control the machine as 
astating. Even the most sophisticated error-correction a natural extension of his or her own body. The addi-
protocols could not scrub the static before the sat-mis- tional stability of a treaded or grav-sled base just wasn’t 
sile or microdrone was hopelessly off course. The taps enough to outweigh the assimilation advantage of actu-
could not usually control the data they inserted into ally giving the mech a humanoid pair of legs.
hostile systems, but it was not necessary to be precise From that point on, mechs became a familiar sight 
when raw noise sufficed to blind their targets. on human battlefields. While they were far more ex-

The results of quantum tap ECM revolutionized pensive than an equivalent weight of gravtanks or other 
naval warfare. Ships were now able to mount defen- conventional war machines, they could shelter kilo-
sive systems that effortlessly negated all but the fastest, meters worth of terrain from the attentions of guided 
best-shielded projectiles. Space combat was forced into projectiles and remote drones. As their importance 
knife-fighting range, with ships blasting each other became clear, the need to defend them from attackers 
with direct-fire energy beams and brute Newtonian prompted new developments in weapon and defensive 
mass weapons that had no guidance to scramble. system mountings.

Today, remote drones and guided munitions are Still, the vast expense of building and maintaining 
of limited use in space combat. Every ship from the a mech force discouraged their use as the main body of 
humblest far trader on up has quantum ECM woven a Second Wave army. Gravtanks, armored personnel 
into its basic comm infrastructure, and defeating it is carriers, and platoons of assault-suited infantry were 
prohibitively difficult for modern TL4 tech. still far more flexible and economical to deploy in bulk.



Mechs •301 

One step larger than suits were light mechs, most 
of which were six to eight meters tall. Light mechs 
were naturally among the most maneuverable and ag-
ile of the mech classes, while still being large enough 
to support the fusion cores necessary for antigrav fins 
or heavy weaponry. Light mechs could equip surpris-
ingly vicious weapon loadouts, as so little power was 
required to move the hull. 

Heavy mechs were the titans of the battlefield, ten 
to thirteen meters tall. This bulk is a significant drain 
on fusion cores, and most heavy mechs were wired 
to provide sudden large surges of power to hungry 
fittings. Heavy mechs could mount the widest range 
of defensive equipment and bear the thickest armor, 
keeping them standing when smaller hulls would fail.

Despite this elaborate development, mech deploy-
ment became more and more uncommon in the latter 
years of the Second Wave. They were an expensive 
solution to a minor problem on the frontier, where 
brushfire wars and guerrilla insurgencies rarely had the 
vast stores of guided munitions that had scourged the 
older battlefields of the core worlds. For the price of a 
single heavy shock mech and a few months of its main-
tenance, a commander could acquire four gravtanks 
and their vortex cannon armaments, or scores of Nem-
esis expert-system warbots. Without the ever-present 
threat of unstoppable remote bombardment, the mechs 
were a remedy to a problem that no longer existed.

Gradually, inevitably, mechs faded from the petty 
battlefields and ambushes of the frontier. They stood 
silent in sealed Mandate bases or in the armories of 
border warlords, too expensive to run save on occa-
sions of dire necessity. Their pilots were left to become 

Refinement and Decay gravtank drivers or flyer jockeys, or just to keep fight-
As with any military device, mech development rapidly ing until some dumb-fire rocket got a lucky hit.
specialized into several different forms and designs, all In the chaos of the Scream and the Silence that fol-
calibrated to different purposes on the battlefield. Even lowed, most of the known mech caches were plundered 
the enigmatic researchers of the Psionic Authority be- for spare parts. Others were raised for a last ride to 
came involved in their development. damnation as their owners spent them extravagantly 

There were three major types of mech hulls: shock, to seize disordered worlds. Few were left operational 
specialist, and psimech hulls. Shock mechs were de- forty years after the disaster, and on even fewer worlds 
signed for direct assault on hardened fortifications or did sufficient industry remain to rebuild or repair them.
for anti-mech combat. Specialist hulls were optimized Those mechs that do remain are often units re-
for particular battlefield duties, especially defensive covered from a long-lost Mandate cache or deep-space 
measures and high-mobility recon. Psimech hulls were supply depot. A few worlds still have the tech sufficient 
the rarest of the three varieties, ancient pretech hulls to build them, and a logistical pipe somehow too lim-
intended to amplify the abilities of a psychic pilot for ited to allow for mass movement of troops or armor. 
battlefield use. These worlds are rare, and it is more often that surviv-

Aside from type, mechs also were classified by hull ing mechs are simply used as the shock troopers for a 
classes. The smallest mechs were “suits”, little more larger army of more conventional weaponry.
than armored exoskeletons roughly three meters tall. But still, here and there among the scattered 
Suits were intended to support the small teams of elite worlds of mankind, mechs can still be found rising un-
shock troopers who made up the tip of an attacking expectedly to meet their foes. For all their lost purpose, 
force’s spear. The armor and equipment loadouts on they remain matchless at their intended role. They are 
suits were very light compared to their larger brethren, echoes of another time, tools meant for precise and 
but they greatly enhanced a soldier’s survivability in the ancient purposes that no longer exist in a coarser age. 
face of heavy fire. Most suits were too small to mount They are iron ghosts from a different age, and they 
quantum tap arrays. whisper of ambitions that modern rulers scarce recall.



302• Mechs

Mech Combat Mechs, Psionics, and Abilities
Combat involving mechs operates in much the same Mechs are treated as extensions of the wearer for the 
way as any other form of combat. Mechs have weapons, purpose of special abilities. Warriors can use their class 
an armor class based on their durability and size, and ability to avoid or ensure a hit while piloting one, and 
hit points to reflect their physical condition. Combat psionic abilities that apply effects to an ally or enemy 
largely works just as it does at human or starship scales, usually apply to their mech as well if such an effect is 
with a few adjustments. reasonable. The precognitive benefits of Destiny’s Shield 

Mechs have Armor ratings in the same way that can plausibly aid a mech pilot, for example, but none of 
other vehicles do, and suit-class mechs use it the same the biopsionic powers could mend scorched metal and 
way. The Armor score is subtracted from the damage broken composites. Mechs are not valid targets for the 
done by each attack that hits, except for damage done Synthetic Adaptation biopsionic technique.
by explosives or TL4 Heavy weapons or that done by Psychics with the Teleportation discipline can 
other massive tools of violent disassembly. Light and teleport their mech at no additional weight cost if it is 
heavy mechs are even more durable, and are immune a psimech. Teleporters with level Teleportation-2 or 
to ordinary small arms, subtracting their Armor rating greater skill in the discipline can manage to shift the 
from the damage done by Heavy weapons. weight of a suit even if it isn’t a psimech variant. Light 

Mechs also have Speed ratings which are used just and heavy mechs of the shock or specialist variety are 
as described in the Vehicles section of the equipment too heavy for any teleporter to move.
chapter, with Pilot as the relevant skill for checks. For 
situations when it is important to determine a mech’s Mech Damage and Repair
movement rating in meters, multiply suit speed by 10 Mechs take damage normally, but leave their pilot un-
meters and light and heavy mech speed by 20 meters to harmed until they are finally destroyed. In most cases, 
find their rate of movement for one round. the enormous energies being thrown around a modern 

A mech’s pilot can fire all of the guns mounted on battlefield make the wearer’s hit points largely irrel-
a mech each turn, and may fire them at different tar- evant. For small mech suits, however, the individual 
gets within range. Targets must all be selected before toughness and stamina of the pilot can make a differ-
the attacks begin, however, and cannot be altered that ence. When a suit-class mech is damaged by an attack, 
round. If all guns are trained on an enemy who’s taken the pilot may choose to take the entire hit off their own 
out with the first lucky shot, the remaining attacks are hit points, to represent their gradual loss of stamina, 
wasted. Suit pilots can fire personal weapons if they focus, and luck.
choose, but they cannot fire both their own sidearms Mechs are fully functional until their last hit points 
and their suit’s equipment in the same round. are destroyed. Once reduced to zero hit points, the hull 

Most mechs have substantial internal ammunition is inoperable and the pilot is exposed to the outside 
magazines, but the amount is not unlimited. A single atmosphere. In hostile environments, most pilots wear 
attack roll might represent several seconds of full-auto vacc suits against this unfortunate possibility.
gunfire. After each fight in which an ammunition-us- The pilot of a mech reduced to zero hit points must 
ing weapon is fired, the pilot must make a Shoot skill also make a Physical save; on a success, they escape 
check modified by Wisdom against difficulty 6. On a the hull with one-quarter of their current hit points, 
success, he fired judiciously and still has ammunition rounded up. On a failure, they are mortally wound-
remaining. On a failure, he has run out of ammo for ed and will require swift application of biopsionics or 
that gun. The difficulty of the check increases by 1 after lazarus patches if they are to survive.
each fight. Ammunition magazines are fully refreshed Repairing one hit point’s worth of damage on a 
as part of each mech’s maintenance cycle. Energy weap- suit costs 500 credits. The same repair on a light or 
ons, melee weaponry, and psitech guns never run out heavy mech costs 1,000 credits worth of materials. A 
of ammunition. single tech can repair a number of hull points of dam-

The integral quantum ECM tap arrays mounted on age equal to their Fix skill plus one for each hour of 
light and heavy mechs negate almost all indirect guided work. Suits can be repaired with no more than the 
ordnance within line of sight of the mech, defeating necessary spare parts and a portable toolkit, but light 
incoming projectiles up to ten or twenty kilometers and heavy mechs require more sophisticated repair fa-
away, depending on conditions. As a general rule, on cilities. Remote repair vehicles and heavy haulers are 
a battlefield with mechs, an attacker needs to be able standard support elements for most mech units.
to see a target to hit it. Alternately, dumb fire rockets Mechs can resist any normal extreme of environ-
or heavy artillery can be used to bombard a mech force, ment, from hard vacuum to a planetary atmosphere 
as these munitions have no guidance systems to scram- of poisonous vapors. Any environment harsh enough 
ble. This ECM is not relevant in defending against the to damage a vehicle will apply the same penalties to a 
weapons listed in this section, but it can make an enor- mech. Mech suits are equipped with three days of food, 
mous difference on a battlefield contested by advanced water, and atmosphere, while light and heavy mechs 
military forces. can support their occupants for up to a week.



Mechs •303 

Manipulation and Smashing Piloting Mechs
Mechs are remarkably agile machines, and can perform Mech control systems rely on contact-free neural scan-
any act of physical dexterity possible for a normal hu- ning and imaging technology combined with induced 
man being. All suits and most larger hulls are equipped somatic feedback projectors. No special harness is re-
with “hands” of some sort for manipulating objects, quired, and any armor with an encumbrance value of 1 
usually waldoed to even finer manipulators that can or less can be worn by a pilot without interfering with 
handle and utilize human-scale objects. Integral sta- the mech’s operation. There is almost never any kind 
bility gravs in all mechs allow them to move over any of key or lockout on a combat mech; the security of the 
surface that can support their weight. Suit hulls can mech is usually based on it being located in the middle 
operate without major difficulty inside most buildings, of a high-tech military base, and not on possession of 
but light and heavy mechs are usually forced to remain a keycard or passcode. A few hours of basic training 
on roadways or solid ground if they lack grav flight. will allow anyone to operate a mech, though elabo-

Mech hulls are extremely strong. A suit can nor- rate maneuvers may be impossible for those without at 
mally tear a suit-sized hole in a standard postech exte- least Pilot-0 skill. Most somatic controls are sufficiently 
rior wall with four rounds of effort, while a light mech flexible to handle human, alien, VI, or True AI pilots.
can smash a hole big enough for it to pass through in Interfacing with a mech requires 1d6 rounds, mi-
only two rounds. Heavy mechs crush barriers with ter- nus the pilot’s Pilot skill. Climbing into a light or heavy 
rible ease, smashing huge holes in an obstruction with mech cockpit usually takes an additional round, as does 
just a single round of effort. Lighter or more primitive donning a suit.
construction gives way in half the time, while fortified There is normally room inside a mech to trans-
armorplast barriers may require 1d6 times as many port the wearer’s readied and stowed equipment. Even 
rounds, or be completely impervious. a suit-class mech can carry a hundred kilos of additional 

If raw lifting weight becomes relevant, suits can gear without slowing down, and light and heavy mechs 
lift and carry one metric ton, light mechs can manage can cart around tons worth of cargo. Such loads tend 
five tons, and heavy mechs can manage twenty tons. to be highly vulnerable to enemy fire, as they’re often 
More than this might be theoretically possible for a hull, protected by nothing thicker than a width of cargo net-
but it taxes the grav stabilizers too badly, and will al- ting. In most cases, it won’t be important for the GM 
most always end up toppling the mech or “fenceposting” to worry about encumbrance for mech pilots. If the 
it thigh-deep into the softer soil beneath it. mech is blown up and the pilot survives, he escapes 

Skill rolls made in a mech suit are treated as nor- with his usual gear while anything strapped to the mech 
mal skill checks, with Pilot being the relevant skill. is destroyed.

Maintenance
The fusion cores that power the hulls require no refu- Twisting Metal

eling, but the engines, servos, magazines, electronics, Mechs are extremely difficult to damage. Even 
and fittings all need regular maintenance and refitting a light mech is armored with advanced pretech 
in order to remain functional. Mechs can operate up composites and active defenses sufficient to shrug 
to 24 hours before maintenance is required. For each off all but the most advanced or brutal weaponry.
further two hours of operation, a cumulative -1 pen- By default, only TL4 Heavy weapons can 
alty is applied to all hit rolls and skill checks with the harm a light or heavy mech. Old-fashioned RPGs 
mech. When the penalty hits -10, the mech shuts down. or machine guns just can’t muster the necessary 

“Parked” mechs don’t count as being in active use. force to crack the iron shells of these engines.
Maintenance for a hull requires the same tools and In some cases, however, TL3 hardware is suf-

facilities as does repair. In one hour, a single tech can ficient to harm a mech. Heavy shaped charges can 
maintain a number of heavy mechs equal to their Fix damage a mech, as can direct hits by howitzers or 
skill rating plus one. They can maintain twice as many other field artillery. Such attacks will still have to 
light mechs and four times as many suits. A mainte- contend with the mech’s Armor rating, but they 
nance cycle for a suit requires spare parts and ammu- could at least theoretically bring down the beast.
nition costing 500 credits, while one for a light mech Other forces simply upgrade existing TL3 
costs 1,000 and a heavy costs 2,000. tech into TL4 equivalents. These weapons have 

Keeping a mech force in the field is expensive. the same combat statistics as their more primitive 
Most commanders prefer to run a maintenance cycle brethren, but they’re equipped with the advanced 
daily, though some resource-strapped leaders minimize explosive charges or augmented ammunition that 
the active use of their mechs and try to stretch out the can hurt a modern mech. PCs who want to get 
periods between upkeep. These frugal ways can come their hands on these upgraded machine guns and 
back to haunt a detachment when they’re suddenly rocket launchers can usually find them on any TL4 
pressed by enemies who have no intention of giving world with an active arms trading industry.
them the time they require to refit their mechs.



304• Designing Mechs

Designing Mechs

Mech hulls are defined by many of the same traits pos-
sessed by a starship, with a few adjustments made for Building a Mech
the unique nature of these engines of war. First, choose a hull class, either a suit, light, or heavy 

Maintenance must be performed on a mech after mech. Then determine whether it will be a heavily-ar-
every 24 hours of operation. For every further two mored shock model, a fast and versatile specialist model, 
hours or fraction thereof, the mech suffers a cumula- or one of the rare psimech types designed for psionic 
tive -1 on all hit rolls and skill checks. This entry gives pilots. Any type may be piloted by any character, but 
the cost in spare parts and consumables for performing non-psychics cannot effectively use psi fittings.
a maintenance pass on a given hull. In one hour, a sin- Select appropriate fittings from the table in this 
gle tech can service a number of heavy mechs equal to section. Each fitting has a cost in free mass and power, 
their relevant Fix skill plus one. Twice as many light and the total requirements of all fittings, weapons, and 
mechs and four times as many suits may be services in defenses cannot exceed the suit’s rated power and mass. 
the same time. Suits can be serviced with little more Some fittings also have a minimum hull size, and can-
than the spares and a portable toolkit, but light and not be mounted on smaller mechs. Psitech fittings can 
heavy mechs require support vehicles with work cranes only be mounted on psimechs.
and more extensive tool selections. Mech fittings can only be installed once for any 

Armor functions in the same way as starship armor particular system, unless noted otherwise. Mech fit-
for most mechs, rendering them immune to damage tings usually require a particular minimum hull class 
from anything smaller than TL4 Heavy weapons, and for installation, with suit-class hulls being unable to 
subtracting from any incoming damage. Suit mechs are mount Skywatch Drones or Comm Interceptors. Psi-based 
an exception, being much smaller and comparatively fittings can be mounted only on psimechs and can be 
more fragile. Their armor subtracts from the damage used only by psionic pilots.
done by small arms, but Heavy weapons ignore it Select the desired weaponry and special defenses 

Hit Points are lost as normal to attacks that dam- for the mech, taking into account their free mass and 
age the mech. Once the mech reaches zero hit points, power costs. Weapons also take up one or more hard-
the pilot must make a Physical saving throw; on a suc- points, and a mech is limited in the number of available 
cess, they escape the mech with one-quarter of their hardpoints for a given model. A mech may be equipped 
current hit points, rounded up. On a failure, they are with as many weapons as it has hardpoints, power, and 
mortally wounded. Pilots of suit-class mechs may opt mass to support.
to take the full damage of an attack off their own hit Tally up the cost of the hull, fittings, weapons, and 
points after the dice are rolled, reflecting a strike that defenses, and make sure that you haven’t overspent 
rattles or exhausts the pilot without doing significant your available power, mass, hardpoints, or budget.
damage to the hull itself. Most TL4 worlds aren’t capable of building mechs. 

Speed, Armor Class, Power, Free Mass, and They were always specialized tools, most useful in in-
Hardpoints all function for mechs just as they do for terplanetary warfare where logistics limits were tight, 
starships. Fittings, weapons, and defenses are all added and the lack of rare resources and need has contributed 
to the base hull up to the maximum load permitted by to the loss of the tech. Still, at the GM’s discretion, some 
a hull’s free mass and power. worlds may still be able to build them from scratch.

Hull Cost Maint Speed Armor HP AC Power Mass Hardpt Class

Shock Suit 150k 500 4 12# 15* 18 10 5 2 Suit
Specialist Suit 150k 500 6 8# 10* 17 5 10 1 Suit
Psi Suit 300k 500 4 8# 15* 20 5 5 1 Suit
Light Shock 500k 1,000 3 15 40 16 20 10 3 Light
Light Specialist 500k 1,000 5 10 30 15 10 20 2 Light
Light Psimech 1m 1,000 3 10 40 17 10 10 2 Light
Heavy Shock 1m 2,000 2 25 70 15 40 20 6 Heavy
Heavy Specialist 1m 2,000 4 15 50 14 20 40 3 Heavy
Heavy Psimech 2m 2,000 2 15 60 16 15 15 3 Heavy
# Suit-class armor does not apply against Heavy weapons. Light and Heavy mechs are immune to non-Heavy attacks.

* Pilots of suit-class mechs may choose to take an attack’s damage against their own hit points after it is rolled.



Designing Mechs •305 

Mech Fittings

Active Camo Surface: This sophisticated mix of chro- ammo cells cannot help again until after a mainte-
matic paneling and holoprojectors renders the nance cycle. Ammunition cells may be fitted more 
mech surprisingly difficult to spot at a distance. than once on a mech.
Suits gain a +2 bonus to Sneak skill checks made Antigrav Nodes: These nodes enable a mech to fly at 
against observers more than ten meters away. their standard rate of movement. Pretech-grade 
Light mechs gain the same bonus against observ- grav nodes can lift a heavy mech, but the great 
ers more than fifty meters away, and heavy mechs majority of grav propulsors can only be fitted to 
apply it against spotters more than a hundred me- suits or light mechs. If pretech nodes are found 
ters away. on the open market at all, the price is sure to be at 

Ammunition Cells: Mech guns are voracious with their least 500,000 credits.
ammunition, and these cells increase the load Augmented Enviroseals: Specialized equipment for 
available to the mech’s guns. When making a Wis/ mechs intended to operate on worlds with inva-
Shoot roll to determine whether or not a mech sive or corrosive atmospheres. These seals can 
has run out of ammo for a gun after a given fight, hold out against contamination or erosion for at 
the pilot can ignore the first failed skill check. The least four times as long as most vehicles on the 

Mech Fitting Cost* Power Mass Class Effect

Active Camo Surface 25k 1 2# Suit Shifts the hull’s coloration to blend with the locale

Ammunition Cells 10k 1# 1 Suit Extends the ammunition supply available to a mech

Antigrav Nodes 50k 2# 4# Suit Allows flight in most gravitic environments

Augmented Enviroseals 15k 1 2 Suit Allows extended operation in hostile environments

Breaching Tool 20k 1 1# Suit Carves large holes in stationary obstacles

Bridging Laminates 10k 1 1# Light Creates a road capable of supporting the mech

Cargo Space 1k 0 1 Suit Grants room to carry an amount of protected cargo

Comm Interceptors 30k 2 5 Light Allows attempts to descramble enemy communications

Construction Array 50k 1# 3# Light Allows mech to serve as a construction facility

Drop Sheathing 10k 0 1# Suit Conceals an orbital insertion

Escape Pod 25k 1 1# Light Improves the odds of a pilot surviving mech loss

Field Medical Unit 25k 2 1# Suit Allows extensive battlefield medical support

Fire Control Unit/Master 100k 2 3# Light Grants friendly mechs a selective fire ability

Fire Control Unit/Slave 20k 1 1# Light Necessary for using an ally’s FCU/Master

Grav Chutes 20k 1 1# Suit Allows orbital insertion of a mech

Inquisitor Probe 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a telepath to read a target’s intentions

Integral Maintenance 30k 2 1# Light Auto-applies field maintenance

Jump Coil 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a teleporter to translocate other mechs

Kinesis Boost 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a telekinetic to increase mech Speed

Neural Activity Sensors 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows any psychic to detect sentient minds

Neural Static Generator 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a metapsion to negate psimech powers

Omen Tap 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a precog to hinder hit or skill rolls

Panoptic Cloud 25k 2 2# Light Emits a swarm of microscopic sensors

Polyspectral Sensors 40k 1 1# Suit Penetrating sensor scan within one hundred meters

Pulse Transceiver 75k 2 5 Suit Allows intra-system faster-than-light communication

Skywatch Drones 40k 1 2# Light Launches drones to observe remote areas.

Vivification Field 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a biopsion to stabilize wounded

Void Thrusters 25k 1# 2# Suit Allows flight in zero or trace-gravity environments

# Multiply this requirement by 2 for light mechs and 4 for heavy mechs
* Multiply all base costs by 3 for light mechs and 6 for heavy mechs



306• Designing Mechs

world. The interval between radiation saving Field Medical Unit: Fire-and-forget medical drones and 
throws is also multiplied by four. heavy diagnostic computing support allow the 

Breaching Tool: A combination of a pickaxe and a demo- mech to provide medical treatment for downed 
litions charge, a breaching tool can be used to blow comrades. When the mech pilot spends a round 
a mech-sized hole in any standard postech build- guiding the med drones, he provides trauma care 
ing material with one round of effort. Against equivalent to a lazarus patch for up to twenty 
hardened military structures designed specifically downed allies within a two-hundred meter radius, 
to repel such efforts, the same hole takes 1d6+1 using his own Int/Heal for the skill check.
rounds to dig. Fire Control Unit: These units come in master and slave 

Bridging Laminates: A slurry of clastic composites versions, with up to five slave units linking to a 
mixes with soil or gravel drawn into the mech’s single master. So long as the master unit’s mech 
feed chutes before being projected into a tough, remains functional and within a one-kilometer 
durable bridge over chasms or trenches. A mech range, it and the other units linked with it can 
can produce 20 meters of bridge per round to a assign weapon attacks one at a time, rolling hit 
maximum distance of 60 meters for any single and damage for each before firing the next.
span. The bridge can bear the weight of a mech Grav Chutes: Mechs with grav chutes take no damage 
of the same size class that built it, and a total of from falls, even from orbital insertions.
600 meters of bridges can be constructed between Inquisitor Probe: By targeting a visible person or mech, 
maintenance cycles. Breaking a hole in the bridge the psimech pilot with at least Telepath-1 can 
requires the infliction of 20 points of damage, or force the person or pilot to make a Mental sav-
40 to completely smash a span. ing throw. If failed, the user gains an impression 

Cargo Space: This space is protected and pressurized. of their current tactical plan and the foremost 
If the mech is destroyed, the pilot rolls 1d6; the thoughts in their mind. A successful save renders 
cargo survives on a roll of 3 or more. Cargo space the target immune to this fitting for 24 hours.
in a suit can carry up to one hundred kilos. A light Integral Maintenance: This system can automatically 
mech can stow up to 500 kilos, and a heavy mech apply a maintenance cycle to itself with 30 min-
can manage 2,000 kilos. Some cargo spaces are utes of downtime. A mech can carry supplies for 
refitted for passengers. up to seven maintenance cycles in the unit.

Comm Interceptors: These polyspectral snoops pick up Jump Coil: Any psychic teleporter can translocate their 
and automatically decrypt transmissions made own psimech, but the jump coil allows the pilot to 
or received near the mech. Civilian comms are teleport up to five additional allied mechs of equal 
automatically broken, while successfully compro- or smaller size along with him, provided they are 
mising a military enemy’s comms requires line of within 10 meters of him.
sight with the source or a recipient and a success- Kinesis Boost: Any psionic with at least Telekinesis-1 
ful opposed Program skill check. can use this psitech to boost their Mech’s Speed 

Construction Array: This mobile repair and construc- rating by 2 and gain +2 to all initiative rolls.
tion array allows a mech to serve as a functioning Neural Activity Sensors: This psitech functions for any 
postech workshop and earthmover for field en- psionic, and allows them to automatically detect 
gineering purposes. A mech with a construction the presence of sentient minds within two kilome-
array can be used to perform repairs and main- ters, with a margin of error of roughly 50 meters 
tenance on itself and other mechs, if spare parts for any given mind. The species of sentient can be 
are available. Most arrays allow for carrying up recognized, but not individuals.
to twice the mech’s own hit points in repair parts. Neural Static Generator: A counterpsi tech, this fitting 

Drop Sheathing: Most mech drops involve nothing allows a psion with at least Metapsionics-1 to 
more than grav chutes to slow the machine’s or- automatically negate any psi-based mech fitting 
bital insertion. Sometimes it’s necessary to drop targeted at it or any visible ally within 400 meters. 
mechs in the teeth of an opposing force, in which The mech also gains 5 additional points of Armor 
case drop sheathing is often added to a mech’s against psi weapons.
equipment loadout. This ablative shielding burns Omen Tap: A psionic pilot can force a visible target to 
away in the atmosphere, but while it lasts, it forces reroll a successful hit roll or skill check. This abil-
defending sensors to make a Program skill check ity can be used once per round, and a maximum 
at difficulty 10 to detect the mech’s insertion. number of times per hour equal to the pilot’s Pre-

Escape Pod: This armored cockpit is programmed to cognition skill level times two.
eject from a fatally compromised mech, landing Panoptic Cloud: A swarm of tiny aerostat sensors sur-
the pilot in a random direction 1d20 x 100 meters rounds the mech out to 200 meters, giving them a 
from the downed mech. Pilots with an escape pod constant awareness of their surroundings within 
may reroll a failed Physical save to avoid mortal that range. The sensors provide both audio and 
injury when their mech is destroyed. visual data, and only atmosphere-tight seals can 



Designing Mechs •307 

keep them out. Their presence will trigger most The drones have standard and infrared telescopic 
advanced security alarms, however. video sensors and can hover at altitudes of up to 

Polyspectral Sensors: These sensors use an array of one thousand meters. While difficult to spot with 
emissions to form a crude model of the terrain 100 the naked eye, skywatch drones are very easy for 
meters in front of the mech, providing rough de- modern anti-air defenses to locate, and rarely last 
tail down to objects one-third of a meter in size. It more than ten or twenty seconds over a military 
cannot penetrate EM-hardened barriers, but does target before being brought down. Any damage 
not normally trigger security alerts. will bring down a drone, but hitting one at max-

Pulse Transceiver: The pulse transceiver effectively imum altitude with a hand weapon requires a hit 
functions as a faster-than-light communications on armor class 25.
laser with a range sufficient to reach the outer rim Vivification Field: This psitech augmentation is de-
of a solar system. Provided the mech knows the lo- signed to key onto recognized allies on the battle-
cation of a receiver, two-way communication can field. When a mech equipped with a field is piloted 
be conducted. The data channel is limited to text by a psychic with at least Biopsionics-1, it auto-
and still images. Commercial commsats can also matically stabilizes mortally wounded allies within 
serve as receivers if a military unit is not available. 100 meters, with no action required by the pilot. 

Skywatch Drones: These small aerostat drones are one- Void Thrusters: These microscale grav plates allow a 
third of a meter in length, with a range of up to mech to fly at its normal base Speed. This flight 
ten kilometers. They can loiter above a site for functions only in zero-gee or microgravity en-
up to eight hours before losing power, and can vironments, but can eliminate falling damage in 
be recharged with an hour in the mech’s rack. standard gravity, even for orbital insertions.

Mech Defenses

Augmented ECM Projector: The quantum taps on this Morphic Silhouette Damper: Holoprojectors and pulsed 
mech have been tuned to interfere with the target- ECM conspire to make it much more difficult to 
ing of enemy weapon systems, at the cost of addi- fix the mech in a weapon’s sights. The effective 
tional power drawn from the motive servos. The range of any weapon targeted at the mech is re-
mech has an effective +2 armor class bonus against duced by half. This benefit is lost if the attacker is 
attacks from other vehicles or mechs, though its within 50 meters of the mech.
Speed rating is reduced by 1. Redundant Systems Buffer: Substantial power and mass 

Hardened Polyceramic Overlay: A relative of the same is devoted to a complex array of redundant sys-
hardened plating used on military warships, this tems, increasing the amount of punishment the 
plating reduces the armor piercing quality of at- heavy mech can take before it is finally destroyed.
tacking weapons by 5. Thus, a heavy laser that Vanguard Plating: Blast vent channels, localized force 
normally ignores 25 points of its target’s armor fields, and advanced damage control monitors 
now only ignores 20. are used to defang armor-piercing weaponry 

MES Shunt Channels: Complex psitech-derived shield- used against the heavy mech. The armor-pierc-
ing circuitry provides limited protection against ing quality of an attacking weapon is reduced by 
psi-based weapons, adding 10 points of Armor 15. This defense does not stack with a Hardened 

that only count against weaponry with the Psi Polyceramic Overlay.
quality. This armor stacks with any gained from 
a Neural Static Generator.

Mech Defense Cost* Power Mass Class Effect

Augmented ECM Projector 75k 2# 1# Light +2 AC bonus, -1 Speed penalty

Hardened Polyceramic Overlay 50k 1# 1# Light AP quality of attacking weapons reduced by 5

MES Shunt Channels 25k 1# 2# Suit Grants Armor 10 versus Psi weaponry

Morphic Silhouette Damper 25k 1# 2# Suit Halves an attacking weapon’s Range

Redundant Systems Buffer 75k 10 5 Heavy Adds +20 hit points

Vanguard Plating 100k 15 5 Heavy Reduces AP of attacking weapons by 15

# Multiply this requirement by 2 for light mechs and 4 for heavy mechs
* Multiply all base costs by 3 for light mechs and 6 for heavy mechs



308• Designing Mechs

Mech Weaponry

Mech weaponry normally requires Shoot skill to fire 
and relies on the user’s Intelligence or Dexterity to de- Mech Weapon List
termine hit and damage modifiers. Most NPC pilots Banshee Vox: A focalized sonic blast stuns and disori-
have a total attack bonus of +3 and damage bonus of ents all organic life in the path of this weapon. 
+1. Veteran pilots average +5 to hit and +2 damage, Damage done by a banshee vox is nonlethal, and 
while the grizzled elite rarely have less than +7 to hit targets brought to 0 hit points by it will wake up 
and +2 damage. 1d4 hours later with 1 hit point. Targets inside a 

Some weapons can be fired to suppress. Every tar- vehicle or behind hard cover are immune.
get in front of the weapon that is not under hard cover Beam Lance: More power-hungry and harder to mount 
is automatically hit for half normal damage, rounded than a heavy laser, the beam lance is meant to cut 
down. A successful Evasion saving throw by the targets through heavy armor on enemy shock mechs.
eliminates this damage. Cutter Plates: Rotating blades, force-field shearing 

planes, or just a really big axe; cutter plates are 
Special Weapon Qualities meant for melee combat and carving large holes 
Ammo: This weapon uses physical ammunition. After through obstacles. Suit cutter plates do 1d12 dam-

the end of every fight in which it was fired, the age, light mech ones do 2d12, and heavy mech 
pilot needs to make a Shoot skill check modified plates do 3d12.
by Wisdom against a difficulty of 6. On a failure, Finger of God: A psitech weapon that can be mounted 
ammo for the gun has run out until the next main- only on psimechs and used by a psionically-active 
tenance cycle is complete. The check difficulty in- pilot, the Finger of God is a brutal weapon that 
creases by 1 after every fight until maintenance. operates soundlessly and without visible emis-

Anti-personnel: Armored vehicles, fortifications, and sions. The psychic piloting the mech selects the 
light and heavy mechs are immune to these light target and channels a massive surge of metadi-
weapons. mensional energy through it. The blast ignores 

AP: The weapon ignores this many points of a target’s all conventional armor and can be expected to 
armor. The Hardened Polyceramic Overlay or Van- suddenly reduce anything smaller than a heavy 
guard Plating defense upgrades may lessen the ef- mech into a smoking heap of scrap.
fectiveness of this quality. The most a weapon’s AP Heavy Machine Gun: A standard choice for anti-per-
rating can do is reduce a target’s effective armor sonnel weaponry, though its TL3 tech makes 
to zero. It cannot add additional damage to a hit. it useless against mech Armor. Upgraded TL4 

Cone: The weapon fires in a conical pattern that many equivalents cost twice as much.
meters long and wide at its end. All targets within Hydra Array: A standard gunnery weapon mounted on 
the cone must make an Evasion saving throw or a mech, fired in volleys as normal for the weapon.
be hit, with no hit roll required. Targets behind Improvised Weapon: This object is something large 
hard cover save automatically. and heavy that the mech has snatched up to use 

Melee: Melee weapons can only be used in hand-to- as a weapon. Suits do 1d8, light mech do 2d8, and 
hand combat, and no non-melee weapon can be heavy do 3d8.
used that same round. Pilots use either Punch or Inferno Projector: A spray of superheated plasma turns 
Stab for hit rolls. Mech melee weapons do not in- everything within thirty meters of the projector’s 
flict Shock damage. aperture into charcoal and casualty reports.

Psi: Psi weapons use metadimensional energy chan- Laser, Anti-Air: This standard light laser has been re-
nels to completely ignore a target’s Armor rating, tuned to optimize it for firing at airborne targets, 
except for any armor granted by the MES Shunt and the range has been greatly increased. It can 
Channel defense fitting. Defenses such as Hardened pick off spy units such as Skywatch Drones auto-
Polyceramic Overlay have no effect on psi weaponry. matically once they have been spotted. The laser 
Pilots may optionally choose to use an appropriate is optimized for firing at “clean” airborne targets, 
psychic skill with psi weapons, even melee variet- however, and suffers a -4 penalty to hit when aim-
ies. Psi weapons rely on Wisdom or Constitution ing for ground-bound targets.
to modify attack and damage rolls, rather than Laser, Anti-Vehicle: A standard gunnery weapon reca-
Dexterity or Intelligence. librated for mech use. When it hits a target with 

Slow: After firing, the attacker must roll an Int/Shoot Armor, it can reroll any “1”s on the damage dice.
skill check against difficulty 8. For psi weapons, Laser, Heavy: A mainstay of heavy shock mechs.
use Int and an applicable psychic skill. On a failure, Laser, Light: The light laser trades the enormous pen-
the gun must cool down for one round before it etrating power of its heavier cousin for a lighter 
can be fired again. power drain and easier fitting requirements.



Designing Mechs •309 

Mech Weapon Cost Dmg Pwr Mass Hard. Range Hull Special

Banshee Vox 35k 2d12 5 3 1 30 Light Cone 30m, Anti-personnel

Beam Lance 100k 5d8 15 5 3 1k/2k Heavy AP 30

Cutter Plates 20k 1d12/class 5 3 1 Melee Suit AP 10, Melee

Finger of God 300k 4d12 6 3 2 500/1k Heavy Psi, Slow

Heavy Machine Gun 10k 3d6 # 3 2 1 500/2k Suit AP 5, Ammo

Hydra Array 40k 3d6 # 6 3 1 2k/4k Light AP 5, Ammo

Improvised Weapon - 1d8/class - - - - - Melee

Inferno Projector 35k 4d6 6 3 2 20 Light AP 10, Cone 20m, Slow

Laser, Anti-Air 40k 3d8 5 2 2 6k/12k Suit AP 10, Special, Slow

Laser, Anti-Vehicle 20k 3d10 7 3 2 500/1k Suit AP 15

Laser, Heavy 75k 3d12 10 4 3 1k/2k Heavy AP 20

Laser, Light 35k 3d8 5 2 1 500/1k Light AP 10

MES Knife 100k 1d12/class 1 1 1 Melee Suit Psi, Melee

Mindburner 200k 4d10 2 2 1 20 Light Cone 20m, Psi

Plasma Thrower 50k 4d10 10 2 2 250/500 Light AP 10

Rail Cannon 150k 4d12 20 5 4 2k/4k Heavy AP 45, Slow, Ammo

Railgun 16k 3d8 # 7 4 2 1k/2k Light AP 15, Ammo

Razor Cloud 30k 3d10 4 3 2 30/60 Light Anti-personnel, Ammo

Rocket Launcher 8k 3d10 3 2 1 2k/4k Suit AP 5, Ammo

Vortex Cannon 150k 5d12 15 5 3 1k/2k Heavy AP 10

Wheatcutter Belt 20k 2d12 2 3 1 10/20 Light Anti-personnel Ammo

# weapon can fire to suppress

MES Knife: This psitech weapon focuses a beam of Razor Cloud: Designed to counter infantry swarms, the 
aligned metadimensional energy into a melee razor cloud pulses fractal shrapnel in a cloud of 
weapon that ignores Armor ratings. Suits do 1d12 steel around the mech. Any target within 30 me-
damage with the knife, light mechs do 2d12, and ters is automatically hit, and may make an Evasion 
heavies do 3d12. save for half damage. Any target within 60 meters 

Mindburner: Named for the horrific hallucinations is automatically hit for half damage, and may make 
provoked in the few targets to survive a glancing an Evasion save to take none. Hard cover protects 
brush from the weapon, the mindburner ruthless- a subject from the cloud.
ly boosts the electrical activity in its targets, burn- Rocket Launcher: A standard Heavy weapon, popular 
ing out human minds and electronic devices with with suit pilots who need more range than a heavy 
equal efficiency. Conventional Armor is ignored machine gun can provide. Rocket launchers also 
by the weapon. have difficulty in locking on targets of human size 

Plasma Thrower: While the range of this energy weap- or smaller, applying a -4 to any hit rolls against 
on is shorter than that of a light laser, it brings them. Conventional rocket warheads are shaped 
slightly more damage to the battlefield. for maximum armor penetration rather than ex-

Rail Cannon: The queen of the battlefield, the rail can- plosive radius, and mech pilots can use them even 
non is a weapon so heavy it can only be mounted against very close targets without blast danger. 
on a heavy shock mech. A single rod from a rail Upgraded TL4 equivalents cost twice as much.
cannon can punch through the best vanguard de- Vortex Cannon: While commonly mounted on grav 
fensive plating as if it were tissue. The weapon is tanks, a vortex can also be fitted to a mech.
prone to overheating, however, and makes cruel Wheatcutter Belts: A standard anti-personnel weapon 
demands on a mech’s power grid. refitted for mech use. When triggered, a belt of 

Railgun: A standard gunnery weapon fitted for mech explosives fires off a scything blast of shrapnel on 
use. Some pilots prefer it over the heavy laser for any side of the mech. All creatures within 10 me-
the sake of the suppressive fire it can lay down its ters must make an Evasion save for half damage. 
good armor-piercing profile, albeit at the cost of Those within 20 meters take half damage, and can 
having to deal with ammo depletion at times. make an Evasion save to take none at all.



310• Example Mech Designs

Example Mech Designs

Achilles Shock Suit Power: 10/2 free Mass: 5/0 free
Cost: 178,000 Armor: 12 against non-Heavy Speed: 4 Hit Points: 15 AC: 18

Weaponry TL4 Rocket Launcher (3d10, AP 5, Ammo), Cutter Plates (1d12, AP 10, Melee)
Defenses None

Fittings None
A cheap baseline shock suit, the Achilles relies on its pilot’s skills to make up for the lack of elaborate hardware. The 
rocket launcher gives the Achilles teeth against enemy armored vehicles or aircraft, while the cutter plates can chew 
through a ferrocrete wall before rapidly shredding any defenders on the other side. Shock-grade armor plating helps 
ensure that the Achilles can survive as a doorkicker for a strike team. Still, the loadout mix forces an Achilles pilot 
to be extremely versatile in weapon handling skills for best results.

Ulysses Specialist Suit Power: 5/0 free Mass: 10/3 free
Cost: 266,000 Armor: 8 against non-Heavy Speed: 6 Hit Points: 10 AC: 17

Weaponry None
Defenses None

Fittings Cargo Space (100 kilos), Field Medical Unit, Polyspectral Sensors, Antigrav Nodes
The Ulysses sacrifices all onboard weapons, leaving the pilot to defend himself with personal small arms in favor of 
packing significant support hardware into the suit’s armored shell. Polyspectral sensors make the suit an excellent 
scout and command unit, while the field medical unit aids in recovering downed allies. The antigrav nodes even allow 
this suit to fly for extended periods, and a Ulysses can lift up to two of its allies with it as it vaults ground obstacles.

Hecate Psi Suit Power: 5/4 free Mass: 5/4 free
Cost: 400,000 Armor: 8 against non-Heavy Speed: 4 Hit Points: 15 AC: 20

Weaponry MES Knife (1d12, Psi, Melee)
Defenses None

Fittings None
Eldritch engines that were rare even in their heyday, the Hecate was designed as a basic platform for a mech-trained 
combat psychic. Its large amount of unassigned power and mass allowed the psychic to fit the particular support 
hardware that best complemented his or her talents, while the integral MES knife was a backup weapon in case of 
sudden confrontation. Most Hecate pilots were expected to remain well behind the front line. Their talents were 
rare and valuable enough to risk only in the best causes, and much of the suit’s engineering margin was devoted to 
advanced ECM and damage control systems.

Angurvadal Light Shock Mech Power: 20/4 free Mass: 10/0 free
Cost: 760,000 Armor: 15 Speed: 3 Hit Points: 40 AC: 16

Weaponry Railgun (3d8#, AP 15, Ammo), TL4 Heavy Machine Gun (3d6#, AP 5, Ammo)
Defenses Hardened Polyceramic Overlay (-5 to enemy AP qualities)

Fittings Ammunition Cells x2
A walking bullet fountain, the Angurvadal is meant to provide long-range fire support against enemy armor, or to 
take the brunt of an advance as needed. Extended ammunition magazines keep it firing after multiple engagements.

Curtana Light Specialist Mech Power: 10/0 free Mass: 20/3 free
Cost: 1,003,000 Armor: 10 Speed: 5 Hit Points: 30 AC: 15

Weaponry TL4 Rocket Launcher (3d10, AP 5, Ammo)
Defenses None

Fittings Field Medical Unit, Panoptic Cloud, Skywatch Drones, Pulse Transceiver
The Curtana is favored by commanders and recon units. Its remarkably powerful sensor and surveillance fittings can 
give its pilot a near-supernatural understanding of the battlefield, in addition to its ability to communicate with HQ.



Example Mech Designs •311 

Durandal Light Psimech Power: 10/4 free Mass: 10/2 free
Cost: 1,605,000 Armor: 10 Speed: 3 Hit Points: 40 AC: 17

Weaponry Mindburner (4d10, Cone 20m, Psi)
Defenses Hardened Polyceramic Overlay (-5 to enemy AP qualities)

Fittings Escape Pod, Neural Activity Sensors
Much like its smaller psi suit brethren, the Durandal is designed with substantial unassigned power and mass in order 
to accept whatever psitech fittings best suit the skills of its pilot. These additions can substantially increase the cost 
of the base hull, which is built to provide multiple redundant survival measures for a psychic pilot. Even a Durandal 
without additional fittings can act as a near-faultless early warning system for incoming enemy sentients.

Scorn Heavy Shock Mech Power: 40/2 free Mass: 20/1 free
Cost: 1,586,000 Armor: 25 Speed: 2 Hit Points: 70 AC: 15

Weaponry Rail Cannon (4d12, AP 45, Slow, Ammo), Railgun (3d8#, AP 15, Ammo)
Defenses None

Fittings Breaching Tool, Integral Maintenance, Ammunition Cells x2
When a fortress stands between an army and victory, a Scorn is sent to correct the situation. Its massive armor plates 
are immune to all but specially-fitted gunnery, and its integral weaponry can smash through almost any substance 
known to human science. The Scorn is the product of late Second Wave military science, however, and is built for 
a battlefield that will only rarely see an opposing mech force. It is somewhat less optimized for facing specialized 
anti-mech units that are equipped with the right armor-piercing weaponry to take the beast down.

Odium Heavy Specialist Mech Power: 20/1 free Mass: 40/1 free
Cost: 2,485,000 Armor: 15 Speed: 4 Hit Points: 50 AC: 14

Weaponry Heavy Laser (3d12, AP 20)
Defenses None

Fittings Construction Array, Integral Maintenance, Skywatch Drones, Polyspectral Sensors, Pulse Trans-
ceiver

While the Odium provides much the same communications and recon abilities as the smaller Durandal, it is dis-
tinguished by the heavy mech-killing laser it mounts and the integral construction array that allows it to serve as a 
remote maintenance and repair facility for numerous other mechs. A single Odium can give a sufficient number of 
techs the platform they need to keep an entire mech force operational in the field, or assist in constructing elaborate 
field structures and fortifications.

Despite Heavy Psimech Power: 20/8 free Mass: 20/8 free
Cost: 3,060,000 Armor: 15 Speed: 2 Hit Points: 60 AC: 16

Weaponry Finger of God (4d12, Psi, Slow), MES Knife (3d12, Psi, Melee)
Defenses Hardened Polyceramic Overlay (-5 to enemy AP qualities)

Fittings Neural Activity Sensors
These vanishingly rare mechs were always somewhat experimental, even in the late days of humanity’s golden age. 
The sheer mass of sophisticated psitech components requires for their construction was almost impossible to acquire 
on the frontier, and the few Despites that are found in the modern day are almost always attached to Mandate military 
research facilities. While substantial mass and power are left unused to allow for pilot-specific fittings, even an unfitted 
Despite possesses enormous firepower. The psitech Finger of God weaponry can effortlessly bypass enemy armor, 
and the gigantic MES blade generated by its melee defense array can carve open a gravtank with a few solid strokes.



Stars Without Number Character Sheet
Name Administer Pilot Work Hitpoints / Conditions Max: Attributes

Connect Program Biopsionics 3 (-2)  |  4-7 (-1)  |  8-13 (+0)  |  14-17 (+1)  |  18 (+2)
Background

Exert Punch Metapsionics
STR

Fix Shoot Precognition
Heal Sneak Telekinesis

(1D6 + Con) x Level Warriors:  Additional +2 per level DEX
Know Stab Telepathy
Lead Survive Teleportation System Strain Permanent:

Class CON
Notice Talk
Perform Trade

INT
+3sp per lvl  (Experts: +1 bonus non-combat) Cost:  new value + 1 Max:  +2 at lvl 3  |  +3 at lvl 6  |  +4 at lvl 9 Max = CON

Level XP
Warrior  =  +Lvl  |  Other  =  +(Lvl ÷ 2) Saves WIS

Base Atk Bonus + Skill PointsPartial Warrior  =  +1 at lvl 1 & lvl 5 Physical Evasion Mental
Homeworld Lvl 2 = 3xp Lvl 7 = 39xp

Lvl 3 = 6xp Lvl 8 = 54xp CHA
Foci +1 Focus at lvl 2, lvl 5, lvl 7 & lvl 10

Employer Lvl 4 = 12xp Lvl 9 = 72xp
Boosts:   1st: 1sp (lvl 1)  |  2nd: 2sp (lvl 1)

Lvl 5 = 18xp Lvl 10 = 93xp Lvl 16 - lvl - [Str | Con] 16 - lvl - [Dex | Int] 16 - lvl -[Wis | Cha] 3rd: 3sp (lvl 3)  |  4th: 4sp (lvl 6)  |  5th: 5sp (lvl 9)
Species Lvl 6 = 27xp Lvl 11+ = +24

Cybernetics / Innate Abilities
Weapons                                                                                     Range and Ammo              Total Atk Bonus

Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods Psionic Techniques +1 on new Psychic Skill Lvl  
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Lvl

Name
+

Mods
Readied Items Max Enc  =  STR ÷ 2

Armor

Name AC

Mods

Name AC
Psionic Effort Effort: 1 + Highest Psychic Skill + Highest of Wis or Con Max:

Mods
Credits Debts

Name AC

Mods



Stowed Equipment (Backpack) Max Enc  =  STR Notes to Remember Noteworthy Achievements

Vehicle, Robot, and Drone Details Aliases / ID’s

Non-Encumbering Equipment
Contacts and Allies

Equipment in Storage Starship Details

Languages Known

Current Goals

Assets / Owned Property



314• Index

INDEX

A 275 Goals  217 Lifestyle Costs  77
Magister  269 Tags  224–225

Actions, Types of  48 Psychic  17 Turns  212 M
Adept  270 True AI  287 Wealth Assets  222–223
Adventure Creation  Warrior  18 Falling  58 Maestros, AI  126

172–191 Combat  48–52 First Wave of Coloniza- Magister  269
Adventure Seeds  186–190 Actions  48 tion  122 Main Action  48
Creating People  182–183 Burst Mode  66 Foci  19–23 Maltech  62
Creating Places  184–185 Common Acts  50 Arcane Foci  272–273 Mechs  300–311
Creating Problems  Heroic Combat  276–277 Focus List  20–23 Designing Mechs  304

180–181 Hitting  49 Forcing Enemy Move- Example Mech Designs  
Example  191 Initiative  48 310
Rewards  178 Mech Combat  302 ment  52

Aiding a Skill Check Morale  59 Fray Die  276 Maintenance  303
Mech Combat  302

  47 Shock  68 Metadimensional Extro-
Space Combat  114–119 G

AI player characters  285 version Syndrome 
Two-Weapon Fighting  

Aliens  202–209 Game Master Resources  
52 28

Alien Player Characters  230–247
Combat armor  64 Metapsionics  34–35

209 Common Complications  
Command Points  115 Morale  59, 195

Arcanist  268 232–234
Converting First Edition Move Action  48

Armor  64–65 One-Roll NPCs  244
Artifact  86 Stars Without One-Roll Patrons  245 N
Shields  64 Number  236 One-Roll Urban Encoun-

Armor Class  49, 64 Credits  60 ters  246 Name Generators  
Artifact Equipment  Crises. See Ship Crises One-Roll Wilderness 238–243

Cyberware  82–85 Encounters  247
86–89 Golden Age of Man  120 O

Artificial Intelligences  
D

280–289 H On Turn Action  48
AI Damage and Repairs  Death  53 Opposed Skill Checks  47

285 Lazarus patch  74 Hacking  54–55
Processing Nodes  284 Defying Doom  277 Hard Vacuum  58 P
Processing Points  286 Disarming a Foe  52 Healing  53
Routines  288–289 Pharmaceuticals  73
True AI PCs  285 Diseases  58 Heroic Characters  

Attack Bonus  24 Draco, AI  280 274–279 Phylactery, AI  283

Drones  80 Defying Doom  277 Poisons  58
Attributes  6 Fray Die  276 Postech  63

E Heroic Combat  276–277 Powered armor  64
B Nemesis Foes  278 Precognition  36–37
Backgrounds  9–15 Effort. See Psionics, History of Space  Pretech  63
Biopsionics  32–33 Effort 120–127 Primitive armor  64

Employees  77 Timeline  126–127 Processing Nodes  284
C Encumbrance  60 Hit Dice 195 Processing Points  286

Equipment  60–91 Hit Points  24, 195 Psionic Authority  122
Character Advancement  Modding and Building  House Rules  237 Psionics  28–43

56 90–91 Biopsionics  32–33
Character Creation  2–27 Execution Attacks  52 I Effort  31

Advancement  56 Expert System Bots  196 Metapsionics  34–35
Backgrounds. See Back- Initiative  48 Precognition  36–37

grounds F Instant Action  48 Psionic Disciplines  30
Quick Character Creation  Techniques  30

26–27 Factions  210–229 J Telekinesis  38–39
Classes  16–18 Actions  214–215

Adept  270 Assets  212 Jump Gates  123 Telepathy  40–41
Teleportation  42–43

Adventurer  18 Bases of Influence  216 Torching  31
Arcanist  268 Cunning Assets  218–219 L

Expert  17 Example Factions  227 Languages  24
Heroic Character Classes  Force Assets  220–221

Lazarus patch  74



Index •315 

R Skill List  8 Street armor  64 Souls  248
Societies  290–299 Systems  44–59 The Net  258–261

Radiation  58 Flavoring the Society  Encumbrance  60 Wealth and Face  250–251
Reaction Rolls  192 298–299 Modifying Starships  True AI Class  287
Robots and VIs  196–199 Origin  292–293 108–109

VI Player Characters  199 Ruled  296–297 Quick Reference  59 V
Rounds, Combat  48 Rulers  294–295 System Strain  32

Space Combat  114–119 Vehicles  78–79
S Command Points  115 T Virtual Intelligences  197

Departments  114 VI Player Characters  199
Saving Throws  24, 46 Ship Combat Actions  117 Technology Levels  63
Scenes  46 Ship Crises  116, 118 Telekinesis  38–39 W
Scream, The  124 Space Magic  266–273 Telepathy  40–41 Weapons
Second Wave of Coloni- Arcane Foci  272–273 Teleportation  42–43 Against Ship Hulls  94

zation  124 Casting Magic  267 Terran Mandate  122 Artifact  87
Sector Creation  128–169 Incandescent Order, The  Tiberius Crohn  120 Heavy  69

Atmosphere  160–161 270–271 Trade, Interstellar  235 Mech  308
Biosphere  164–165 Space Travel  110–111 Transhuman Campaigns  Melee  68
Points of Interest  Starships  92–119 248–265 Ranged  66–67

170–171 Building  94 Character Generation  Starship  102–103
Population  166–167 Combat. See Space 253 Vehicle  78
Tech Level  168 Combat Digital Combat  260 World Tags  132–161
Temperature  162–163 Defenses  101 Digital Programs  261
World Tags  132–161 Example Starships  Digital Shells  258 X

Services  77 104–107 Mechanical Shells  
Shields  64 Fittings  96–100 256–257 Xenobestiary  192–209
Ship Crises  116, 118 Hulls  94–95 One-Roll Polity Missions  Alien Player Characters  
Shock  68 Maintenance and Repair  264 209

113 Organic Shells  254–255 Aliens  202–209
Silence, The  124 Modifying  108–109 Polities  262–264 Beasts  200–201
Skill Checks  47 Sensors and Detection  Polity Mission Rewards  Humanity  194–195
Skills  7–8 112–113 265 Reaction Rolls  192

Magic Skill  266 Travel  110–111 Reputation  251 Robots and VIs  196–199
Skill Checks  47 Weaponry  102–103 Shells  249

Imperishable Galactic Overminds
/\|<|-|²°²° Andy Buell Cameron Jacobs Colin Lampson Det. Sgt. Keaton Kumar
Aaron Michael Martin Anthony Parsch Carl Brian Mattsson Connor Clark Devon “All Daggers” Anderson
Adam Arthreas Carl Turner Conor Lydic Devon Mymko
Adam Doochin Arthur Braune Carl Woeck Corbin Dickmuncher5001
Adam Dray Arthur Decaneas Casey James Bates Cousin Artaud Diversify
Adam Freitag Arturs Leitans Chad Craig Johnson Donald A. Turner
Adam G. Austen Higgins-cassidy Chad Andrew Bale Craig Long Donna Howard
Adam Whitcomb Bavo Charles Phillips Crystal Rivers Doug Elliott
Adrià Prat BC Parker III Charles Pugsley Cyberrottie Doug Grimes
Adrian Coombs-Hoar Ben Chase Waliky DacholaEtecoon Drew Wright
Adrian Stymne Ben Fierce Chaz Rosado Dactylus Edd Glasper
Ai-Viet Lam Benjamin Chojnacki Chip Warden Dale Martin Edgar Johnson
Alan Edens Benjamin Copeland Chris Clary Damian Henderson ElyEzer Lima da Costa
Alec Hunter Benjamin Russell Chris Collins Damian Trujillo Eric
Aleksandr Filipovich Beth Hosek Chris Gunning Dan Rogart Eric Blair
Alex Duden Billy O Carter Chris Herrell Daniel Eric Haste
Alex Gagnon Blaine Murawski Chris Londrie Daniel Alm D́ Adda Eric Jackson
Alex Hobbit Sennert Bob Minadeo Chris McCollum Daniel Gregory Eric Ullman
Alex O Bobloblah Chris McDougall Daniel Johnson Eric Webre
Alexander Brandon Tomlinson Chris Montroy Daniel Ley Erik
Alexander Cain Brandon Wiley Chris Tavares Daniel Newman Erik Hansen
Alexander DiMieri Brandon Wu Christian Leonhard Daniel Torres Erik Johnson
Alexander Ellis Brendan Christoffer Andersson Daniel Ziegler Erin Congdon
Alexander Gräfe Brendan G. Conway Christopher Avery Darío Tórtola Navarro Ethan
Alexander Ihle Brett Bozeman Christopher Hamilton Darren Johnson Ethan Deneault
Alexander Kimball Brian Christopher Laginja DarthThrawn Everitt Long
Alexander Reilly-Vinicombe Brian Bleakley Christopher Mangum David Bresson Evil Kill One
Alexander Wilkinson Brian Isikoff Chuck David Cole Exodus Phyr
Allan Hise Bruno Buss ChuckB David D. F
Amira “Unity” Izengor Bryan Considine Clark Landis David Futterrer Fernie
Amnet Bryan Meyer Clark Tollefsen David J. Hastings Filthy Monkey
Ana Bryan Tholen Claude Martins David Rybacki Frank
Andrew “Zakero” Moore Bryce Clifton Claude Weaver III David Tetley Frank Dickerson
Andrew Decker burttd2010 Clay Dennis Dawid Wojcieszynski Fritjof Olsson
Andrew Swift Caleb Seek Clayton Rennie Derik Badman Frits Kuijlman
Andrew Webb Calle Englund Coffey Kin, Barista of Valoria Desiree C Gadigan



316• Backers

Gajus Miknaitis Joel Callahan Mark Braasch Paul Hampshire Simon Early
Garrett John A W Phillips Mark Sieger Paul Hillers Simone Pietro Spinozzi
Gary John B. McCarthy Mark Solino Paul Mitchell Skellious
Ged Trias John Bowlin Markus Florén Peet Conrick Skytherin
Geoffrey Rodebaugh John Haberle Marshall Miller Per Mevius Stacie Winters
Giaus John Ivor Carlson Martin Legg Pete Shaw Starfox98011
Gina Ricker John Marshall Martin Schramm Peter Heeringa Stéphane Palmeri
Glenn Driver John Mehrholz Mason Phil Bordelon Stephen
Glenn K Gammon John Robertson Matt Phil Stepp Stephen ‘Woody’ Woodley
GrazulDazul John Wancho Matt Lalemand Philip Hindley Stephen Brandon
Greg Jon Mayo Matt McDonald Philip Rogers Stephen Chen
Greg Davis Jon Stein Matt Silver Philip Wan Stephen Lee
Greg McWhirter Jonathan Lovin Matteo Cantelmi Phillip Sacramento Stephen Malone
Griffin D. Morgan Jonathan Moyer Matthew Escher QuirkyAI Steven Dolges
Gwarh Jordan Matthew Orwig Radosław Grzanka Steven L Cowan
Hamad Al-Mannai Jose LaCario Matthew Pemble Randall D Bailey, Jr Steven M. Smith
Hariel Pereira Joseph Brown Matthew Wallace Randy Andrews Stoperssonn
Harry0001 Joseph Cruz Mattias Nilsson Raymond Weidner Sudanna
Hipes Joseph Nathaniel Harrell Max Ward Redfuji6 Taiga Brenerman
Hu1k5mash Joseph Paxson Meciel Reece Adams Tanner Critz
Hubnutzen Josh Reynolds Megan Andrew REM Tarry Higgins
Hunter Bodoh jtc1975 Mendel RemoteRyan Taylor Richardson
Ian Saint Jumaani Davison Michael Blank Rich Spainhour Terry Chay
Isaac West Justin Michael Drew Richard Thalji
Izberion Justin Crowther Michael Gray Richard Sorden ThePiachu
J Patrick Stebbins Justin Vander Schaaf Michael Johnson Rise Up Design Thomas Biskup
J. Budovec Kahleel Hassan Michael Kennedy Rob Martine Thomas Bock
J. D. Beers Karl Stevens Michael Kusternig Robert Baldridge Thomas Graham
Jacob Lund Karl Vestin Michael Little Robert Bersch Thomas L. Azar, Jr.
Jacob M. T. Kathryn V. Fields Michael Lord Robert De Luna Thomas Marcarello
Jacob Poulette Keith E. Clendenen Michael Stevens Robert Gamble Thomas Saboy
Jacob Stuart Kelly Griffin Michael Wightman Robert Kukuchka Thomas Woodall
Jai Kenneth MacNeal Michael Wood Robert M Tim Baker
Jake Parker Kevin Michael Zacharias Robert Panzer Timothy N Turba
James Hill Kevin Brown Michal Roberto Micheri Todd
James Owens Kevin Davis Mike Leone Roh Todd Gibel
James Porter Kevin Harris Mike Teuscher Rolunde Todd Stephens
James V Kevin Langley Mike Westley Ron Smay Tom Drever
Jameson Mulroney Kevin Parrish Milak Ron Veirs Tony Badano
Jamie Cook Kickbacker Mindy Bruecher Ross Shaw Tracy O’Brien
Jamie Duke Kirby Bridges Mitch Perkins Russell Beidler Tripp Ritter
Jamie Manley Kirk Katzburg Mortaneus RuthlessSimster Tyler Brisbin
Jasmine Galanodel Kristopher Rodrigues Mykal Wells rvn1972 Ulf H.
Jason Kyle Charron Nathan G. Ryan Leavengood uzlug
Jason Duke Kyle Garrett Nathan Gillispie Ryan Poe Vic Smith
Jason Kennelly Kyle Pinches Nathan Grainger Sam Sarphatie Vicente Cartas Espinel
Jason Sprowl Kynnin Scott Nathan Trail Sammi Hadert Vince Mahoney
Jason Stewart Laconic Nathanael Cole Samuel Ford Vincent
Jay Rab Lanord Nathaniel James Sanicos Vincent Brown
Jay White ldhtv Nicholas Taylor Sascha Schewe Vincent Kindfuller
JB Joyner Leonard Rosenkranz Nicolaj Vinholt SaveSriracha Walrexx
jbertucci40 LetsHunt Nicolas Johnson Scott Chisholm William Alexander
Jeff Craig Lexi Taylor Nikolas Kieker Scott Edward Nash William Drummond
Jeff Scifert Linus Råde Noé Falzon Scott Elderkin William Raillon
Jeff Szusz Lippai.Peter NovanIV Scott Stenroos Wraith
Jeff Zitomer Lorenzo Gatti Olaf Buddenberg Scott Templeman Wright Johnson
Jerry G Prochazka Lukas Sommerauer Pandiano Scott Wingate Xzov
Jerry Weiler M. Sean Molley Patrice Mermoud Sean Zaleski Yann Abaziou
Jim Pheric Donaldson Mads Ammitzbøll Patrick Healey Seth MacQuade Parker Zachariah Lund
Jimmy Locatelli MagnusLL Patrick Ludwig sgetty Zak Ralston
JM Navarro Manwell Hung Paul Shaun Froude-Powers Zak Schultz
Joan A. Fontas Marc Chretien Paul Acree Shaun Reid Zeke Hamlin
Joaquín Aguirrezabalaga Marc D. Natural Paul Bird Shawn
Joe Wasson Mario Butter Paul Browning Shawn P

Illustrious Kickstarter Backers
$ P A C E B O Y $ 3 0 0 1 Adam Chance Adrián López Alex Hesketh Alicia Carr
100Luck Adam Coleman Adrián Rico Alex London Alistair Collins
A. Purroy Adam Crandall Adrian Smith Alex Pastena Alkemi
a.merrill.c@gmail.com Adam Crossingham Adrian Yalj Alex Schor Allan Bray
Aamir, Benoit, Izzy, Ema, and Adam Crump Adriano Alberti La Marmora Alex Shiley Allan Kumka
Isaac Adam Derda Adrienne Alex Spooner Allan MacKenzie-Graham
Aaron Berger Adam Duffy Adumbratus Alex Thompson Allan Rodda
Aaron DeChant Adam Kluga Ahmad Dialdin Alex Torres Allen Gimenez
Aaron J Pianka Adam Koebel Aidan Alex Wreschnig alx
Aaron J. Schrader Adam Leif AJ Alexander Amanda “OwlBear” Hather
Aaron Lim Adam Makey AJ Fritz Alexander Dustin Leavitt Amr
Aaron Marks Adam Mertes AJ Hines Alexander Gonnella Anbaraen
Aaron Pollock Adam Metz AJ Pettengill Alexander Hack Anders Aronsson
Aaron Terrell Adam Oedekoven Akubaar and the Snowchicken Alexander Mulhern Andras Furness
Aaron Vincent Adam Ozment Alan Alexander O. Smith André Bogaz e Souza
Aaron Webb Adam Poppenheimer Alan Cohen Alexander Storey Andre Ragsdale
Aaron Winemiller Adam Rajski Alan Lough Alexander Szczuczko André, Alias DD
Abdul Rasyid Adam Rogers Alastair Yates Alexander Ulbricht Andrea Casamassima
Abimael Montalvo Adam Schwaninger Alban Alexandre L. Lescarbeau Andreas Loeckher
Achim Kaltz Adam Shepherd Alberto Camargo AlexBrodie Andreas Timel
Ackinty Adam Snyder Alex AlexDemille Andreaz Forsgren
Adam Adam Thompson Alex Bainbridge-Robb Alexey Andrej Poljak
Adam Ackerman adam.y.rayes@wmich.edu Alex Brooks Alexis Cole Andres G Aguirre
Adam Buick adamlanthier@gmail.com Alex Davey Alfmeister Andrew
Adam Buti Addison Noxy Alex Gambrel Alfonso Carrillo Andrew Anilkumar
Adam C Adrian Lazaro Breto Alex Hayes Alfonso Junquera Perez Andrew Armstrong



Backers •317 

Andrew Bedoy Barry Swodeck Bryan Kendall Chris Mitchell Cristian
Andrew Behrens Barry T Snyder Bryan O. Chris Nason Crosse
Andrew Bennett Bartek Ewertowski Bryan Parry Chris Pickel Croy Salinas
Andrew Berdan Bartłomiej Gniatkowski Bryant Durrell Chris S Cryoban
Andrew Best BattleMats Bryce Duzan Chris Slazinski CTibbs123
Andrew Branstad bd9538@gmail.com Bullfrog Chris Slowinski Cultist of Sooty
Andrew Broseidon Church Beast Burnsy Chris Sparke Curt Meyer
Andrew Byers Ben Burtin David Chris Taylor Cutter Goode
Andrew D Devenney Ben Friedman C P Chris Trigger CyberHippie
Andrew Dooley Ben Gallardo C P Johnston Chris Turner D Morris
Andrew Dylan Wheatley Ben Hale C. Hamilton Chris Wagener Daimadoshi_CL
Andrew Ertl Ben Hardekopf C. Lee Vermeers Chris Wagner Dain Lybarger
Andrew Fielder Ben J B C.P. Stanford Chris Westbrook Dale
Andrew Franklin Ben Landers C.R. Harper Chris Whitney Dale C. Blessing
Andrew G.M. Sim Ben Lewis-Evans Cal Kotz Chris Wilms Damion Meany
Andrew Gil Ben Pice Cale chrispalmasi@gmail.com Damon Wilson
Andrew Glencross Ben Potts Caleb Christian Corey Dan
Andrew Gold Benjamin Baer Caleb Michael Powers Christian Eilers Dan Barton
Andrew Gordon Benjamin Brown Calle Christian Kitchener Dan Behlings
Andrew Harter Benjamin Davidson CallMeWilliam Christian Korslund Dan Brackmann
Andrew Hébert Benjamin Norby Callum Ballantyne Christian Pozzali Dan Cruickshank
Andrew Ho Benjamin Odegaard Callum Moore Christian Svalander Dan Hindmand
Andrew Johnson Benjamin Reggett Calvin Smith Christof Berger Dan Koeplinger
Andrew Jordan DeWitt Benjamin Rivers Calvin Yiu Christoffer Eriksson Dan Lalich
Andrew Laliberte Benjamin Terry Camaxtli Lopez Christophe Bj Breysse Dan Luxenberg
Andrew Lorenz benomnes@gmail.com Cameron Paine Christopher “Kier” Conroy Dan Martland
Andrew McMenemy Beregon Cameron Webb Christopher Aaron Johnson Dan Vince
Andrew Moss Bern Osterhaug Camryn Hebert Christopher Alan Slater Dane Holden
Andrew Murray Bgabin Captain of the Trigati Christopher Blackett Dane R
Andrew Neale Bill Vee Cardinal Christopher Bruce Dani Jang
Andrew Nordstrom Billk Caree Parson Christopher Callagan Daniel “Aziraphale” Holmbäck
Andrew Piseck Bjørn Benjaminsen Carey Newhouse Christopher Coulthard Daniel Bayless
Andrew Rachunok Bjørn Døstrup Christensen Carey Williams Christopher Crowe Daniel Cleveland
Andrew Schleifer Black Eagle Carl Christopher D Meid Daniel Crisp
Andrew Stafford Blackwood Melrose Carl Clare Christopher Krueger Daniel Davis
Andrew Sutton Blain Brigance Carl Hickman Christopher Lavery Daniel Drake
Andrew Taylor Blair Giles Carl James Black Christopher Lee Daniel Dudugjian
Andrew Vikinger Gill BlaiseLighter Carl Martinsson Christopher Lee Kemper Daniel Engström
Andrew Whitwham Blarghedy Carl Speakman Christopher M Daniel Fernández García
Andrew221 Blaze Utz Carl Walter Christopher Morley Daniel Forinton
Andy Slack bleftwich Carlos Eduardo da Silva Leal Christopher Peter Daniel Freeman
Angelo Pileggi Blue Tyson Carlos Torrealba Christopher Pietrzak Daniel G. Dyrda
ANGLICO Bob Clifford Carmelo Di Noto Christopher Querfurth Daniel Grondin
Anker Foss Bob Mosdal Carroll J Hunter Christopher Robichaud Daniel J. Bishop
Ann Marie Bob Olsson Carson Talley Christopher S. Knott Daniel Jonsson
Anon Bobby Frost Carsten Magerkurth Christopher Trdan Daniel Kühbacher
Antero Garcia Boredom Rules Carter Guy Christopher Wiebe Daniel Lawrence
Anthony Boris Cas Hoffman Chuck Dee Daniel Lofton
Anthony Dalia Braden Todd Curtis Casey Cian Shay Daniel Maberry
Anthony Foderaro Bradford Barrett Casey Garske Ciril Neukom Daniel Markwig
Anthony Hansen Bradley Allen Casey Shelton Claes Svensson Daniel Maxson
Anthony Paul Rota Brand Robins Caz Claire West Daniel Mayer
Anthony Puhl Brandon Boulter cdaniel Clay Broeker Daniel McSorley
Anthony Ragan Brandon Metcalf CdeB Clay Fowler Daniel Nordström
Anthony Stillwagon Brandon Robertson Cemal Clay Gardner Daniel Norton
Antoine Lenoir Brandon Wolff Chair grills Clay Vernon Daniel Ravipinto
Antonio Soriano Brass Jester Chamo Clayton Higbee Daniel Rodriguez
Antti Luukkonen Brenna M Chance Clément Perrochaud Daniel Sattich
Antwan Brennan Dawson ChaosModifier Cliffjord Daniel Skrivanek
aprrrl Brent Walters Charles Clint Cachia Daniel Spencer
ArchDuke Baron Breton Vander Zouwen Charles Blanco Clint Okerstrom Daniel Stack
Aric Brett Gonta Charles McKnight Clint Williams Daniel Stewart
Ariel Surya Brett Kassel Charles Summerhill Clint1337 Daniel Ungooglable Danilenko
Ariel Thomas Brett Pierani Charles Wuchner Cody Daniel Valda
Armisael Brett Volz CharlesDM Cody Hines Daniel Winter Good
Aron Morris Brettly S. Chase Day Cody Maggard Daniel Yauger
Aron Smith Brian “Commodore Strargazer” Chase Uehara Cody Marbach Danielle Weaver
arosales@mgroomer.com Whitcraft Chase Walker Cole Brown Dante Van Devva
Arthur Perkins Brian Babyok Chelan Blankinship Cole Nordin Darren MacLennan
Arthur Reed Snyder, Jr. Brian Carson-Plybon ChosenShadow Colin Darryl Hills
Artistic New Directions Brian Ericson Chris Colin “Vindexus” Kierans Darth JoDa
Ary Ramsey Brian Fowler Chris Allison Colin Fredericks Darth Krzysztof
Asa Brian Gute Chris Archer Colin Mayer Daryl Holm
AsenRG Brian Habenicht Chris Ballmann Colin Sinclair Daug45
Aser Tolentino Brian Holden Chris Bernhardi Colin Urbina Dave
Atlictoatl Brian Houle Chris Bertram Colineff Dave Boyd
Audun Beck Brian Hubbard Chris Best ColinJ Dave Dunaway
August Karl Pokorak Brian Johnson Chris Chambers Collin Dave Kester
Aureliano Hornos Brian Kirchhoff Chris Clinton Collin O’Connor Dave Sherohman
Aurélien Laurent David Brian Kudlicki Chris Dagen Colm O’Hara Dave Wolf
Bersano Brian M Chris Del Gigante Cominius David
Austin Brian McDonald Chris Edwards Conall Hammond David (Jester’s) Craft
Austin Lawr Brian McGillivray Chris Galecki Connor David Bowes
Auston Schrougham Brian Novotny Chris Gardiner Constantin Patrascu David Comer
averyfinecat Brian Pendleton Chris George Contesse David Csobay
Avram Grumer Brian Perkins Chris Halliday Corey Hall David Daw
AW Brian Pierce Chris Harvey Cory Heminger David Dickinson
Azlunde Brian Spinetti Chris Hasson Cottar Bort David Dodge
B Brian Stafford Chris Hu CP David Donohoo
B. Eidsor Brian Wickhem Chris Jahn CP McInerney David E
B.A. Umberger Brian Wright Chris Jansky Craig David Gallo
Bad Example Brody Hawkins Chris Kalapodis Craig A Tyler David Ginsburg w/Tales from 
Badukd0 Brogen Chris Kenna Craig Bishell the Fandom podcast
Baff Bruce Alexander Marshall Chris Lawrence Craig Concepcion David Goren
BAK Bruce E. Coulson Chris Matuszek Craig Janssen David Harrison
Bakshi Mushailov Bryan Chris Miller Craig Senatore David Jenks
Barry Dewey-Robertson Bryan Jenkins Chris Mitchell Craig Wright David Johnston



318• Backers

David Jordan Dylan Mikus Flávio Stresser Gregg Thomason Jacob Barrick
David Karlsson Dylan Prentiss Flession Gregory Stayner Jacob Derby
David Keijser Dylan Sinnott f libb Gretchen A Jacob Dill
David Klemish Dylan Vincent Distasio Florent Poulpy Cadio GrimLost Jacob Poole
David Lai Dylan Whitney Florian Aßmann grogmonster Jacob Repp
David Leong E.T.Smith Florian Hübner gstewart Jacob Schwartz
David Lindsay Earl Scott Nicholson Florian Ziesche gsugu Jacques Nel
David Little Ecintron Fnorder Guerin Payne Jaden Gailey
David Margowsky Ed Dobies Forrest Fleming Gunnar Bangsmoen Jake
David Martel Ed Kilcawley Foxman Guy Reece Jake Akin
David Menefee Ed Silver Francois Fleury gwathdring Jake Marsh
David Moreland edchuk Francois Giuntini Gwendalyn Toh Jake Simon
David Murphy Edgar Burke Frank Falkenberg Hannes Vilmi Jake Steinmann
David Nebauer Eduardo Inza Frank Mitchell Hanno Jake Williamson
David Nixon Edward Engquist Frank Perrin Hans BK Jakob Schmidt
David Paul Guzmán Edward Fewtrell Frank Tonn Hans-Jörg Meyer Jakob Zagone
David Priestley Edward Hand Frankie Harpal Khalsa James
David Renna Edward Kabara Franko F Harrison Salzman James A
David Ross Edward Kline Frantisek Bujnoch Harrison Snodgrass James B
David Rubin Edward Mallett Fraser Imrie Harrison Storer James Barrie
David Scoggins Eigen Ignacio Fred Parham Harrison W. James Burgess
David Shugars Eirik Oterholm Nielsen Fred Ramsey Harry Danby James Carpio
David Sullivan Elad Hen Freddie Bell Harry John Shephard James Corlett
David Viars Eldrvarya Freddy Pollock Harry Smith James D’Amato
David Wellcome Elijah “Razu” Reyes Frederick Münch Hauke Fock James Dillane
David Yellope EM Frederick Richmond Hayden Churchill James Duffy
David Zimmerman Emil Wisti FredH Heinrich Krebs James Dunbier
david.horrocks Emlyn Breese Fredrik Larsson Hendell James E Goodrich
Dawei Yao Enoch Starnes frostalma@gmail.com Henrik Lemos James Ellis
DD Ra EnterElysium furstenberger Henry James Forest
De Bona Michaël Eother G. Hartman Henry “PandaDad” de Veuve James Gilray
DeadDocus Eric Gabriel Sorrel Henry Owen James Halmayr
Deborah A. Dunlap Eric Grice Gabriele Fasano Henry Ulrich James Heath
Declan Cox Eric Koch Gage HerntheHunted James Holden
Declan O’Brien Eric Levanduski gajoos hidsnake James Holloway
Demetrius K. Eric Lopez Gallant Knight Games Hiltz James Husum
Demonhunter198 Eric Maloof Garbelion Hisher James Jordan
Denis Ricard Eric Matta Gareth Crees Hobbs665 James Lund
Dennis Binder Eric Rumfelt Gareth Fowler HolyBane James N Blevins
Dennis Malloy Eric Sanday Gareth Harrison Horus James Noble
Dennis Osborne Eric Schaffer Garrett Comerford Hugo Marrero Ballesteros James Overton
Dennis Sieg Eric Williamson Garth Dighton Hunter Pfeiffer James Padley
dennis.witt@protonmail.ch Erich L. Gary Anastasio Hunter Wiench James Petrosky
Derek Mitchell Erick Carlson Gary Furash hydranoid52@live.com James Pintal
Derek Schwab Erick Vallejos Gary London Hydre James Powell
Derek Watkins Erik Belsaas Gary McBride hyperotic James Pullen
Derrick Cook Erik Dupont Gary Shelton Iacopo Benigni James Ramirez
Derrick Dodson Erik Halvarsson Gaston Keller Iain Gillett James Ritter
desrtfx Erik Labelle Gatis Melkus Ian & Catherine Woolley James Robertson
Devin Janelle Erik Schmidt Gavin Lemon Ian Borchardt James Schmidt
Devin King Erik Talvola Gavin Mendeck Ian Cunningham James Smith
Devin McIntyre Erik Tenkar Gavin Mutter Ian Donald James T
Devon Erik Turner Gene D. Ian Franklin James Taylor
DGSnyder Erkan Geoff Gillan Ian Gibson James Tomazos
Dick Boardman Erratication Geoff Watson Ian Gunther James V Nutley
Diego Ramirez Espen Otlo Geoffrey (Jetstream) Walter Ian Helmke Jameson Cunningham
Dillon Burke Ethan Geoffrey Crouse Ian Herbert Jamie
Dimensionld@yahoo.com Ethan Eichstedt-Anderson Geoffrey Goucher Ian McFarlin Jamie Eiichi Yoshida
Diogo Nogueira Ethan Harris Geoffrey Kerslake Ian Runkle Jamie Officer
Dirk Nobels Ethan Jackson Geoffrey T. Nelson Ian Scheff ler Jan Novák
DivNull Productions Ethan Mc Donald George & Maria Orlov Ian Urbina Jan van der Laan
Djroma12@aol.com Ethan Monahan George Alexander Ian Ward Jan van der Wielen
docshadow13 Ethan Trovillion George Carter-Bennett Ian Williams Janne Hongisto
DocSocrates Ethan Zarembski George Cummings Ignatius Montenegro Janne Puonti
Dohtoor Etienne Olieu George G Hoeflinger Impius Jarad W.
Dominic Bozzo Euclides Pereyra Gerald InfiniteGeek Jared Hatchell
Dominic Moore Eva-Fiona Denehy Gerald Rose Inkwell Ideas Jared Norman
Dominick Trascritti Evan Gerard Hoey interiis Jarikith - SpaceKatta Hero-U 
Dominik Pielarski Evan Cohen Gérard Kraus Inversions AGL589
Don Evan Garay Gerben van der Heijden Iowa Moondog Jarrett
Donald Welsh Evan Gilbreath Germán Jakob Ironhouse Jarrod Maistros
Donnovan Evan Lee Gerrit Czeplie Isaac ‘Will It Work’ Dansicker Jason Allen
Dorion Evan Stark Gerry Saracco Isaac VanDuyn Jason Aschberger
Dorjan Smoković evangben1999@gmail.com Gestaltar skiten Isaac Wallace Jason Bean
dotha1dave@gmail.com Every Other Weekend Gaming Geza Letso Isabeau T. Silver Rain Jason Byrne
Doug “Kosh” Williamson Evil Midnight Lurker Gideon Mecum Ishkar Jason Colombetti
Doug Hurst Ezann Giles Dorrington Ismihall Jason Corley
Doug Mercer Ezzarius Gillan Martindale Ivan Jalencas Jason Lee
Doug Miller Fabio Almeida Glen King Ivan Krechetov Jason Lescalleet
Doug Pirko Fabio Milito Pagliara Glen Parker Iván Tomás Jason Mavor
Dr. Alberto Colombo Facephase Glenn Hallenberg J K Rasmussen Jason Orne
Dr. Marko Poleczek fanguarn Glenn Rohrlach J. Michael Looney Jason Paasch
Dr. VanPorcine Farid Kutyev Glenny Kenpachi Ramasama Jaan Eerik Sõmermaa Jason Price
dragon513@comcast.net faultedravage28@gmail.com Gord Sellar Jack Clarke Jason Rampata
Draško Prašnički Fedly Guerrier Gordon Cranford Jack Fagan Jason Redford Drifter-Trenner
Drew Felisberto Lagartinha Gotta397 Jack Gulick Jason Rieusset
Drew C. W. Felix Grothkopp Grady Victory Jack Harvey Jason Scranton
Drew Hurdle Felix Roithmayr Graeme Frear Jack Liska Jason Tocci
Drew Walker Felix Rosenberger Graeme Lewis Jack Marshall Jason Wentworth
Drnoodles FelTK Graham Gentz Jack Murphy, III JavaJoeCoffee
drnuncheon FeralGames Graham Heath Jack Norris Javier Koslow
Drwgbliadd@gmail.com Fernando Segismundo Alonso Grant Jack Sernovitz Javier Perez Garcia
Ducke Garzón Gray Shackelford Jack Shirai Jay Marsh
Dustin Headen Fery GreenWolf Jackson Anderson Jay Richards
Dustin Knie Filip Ogrodowczyk Greg Jacob Jay Ward
Dustin_00 Finbar Deane-Stott Greg Mele Jacob “King” Barrick Jayson Turner
Dylan Green FireSerpent Greg Wood Jacob Banda JD



Backers •319 

Jean John Doyle Joshua Kevin Patti Lord of Ice
Jean GAMBA John Duffield Joshua Cameron Kevin Schott Lordson Yen
Jean-Christophe RANNOU John Eisenhauer Joshua Crowe Kevin Searle Loren
Jean-Francois CABIROL John Even Bjørnevik Joshua James Gervais Kevin Smith Loren Thompson
Jeff Bernstein John Everett Till Joshua kooistta Kevin Tompos Lorenzo Bandieri
Jeff Brooks John Farinelli Joshua LH Burnett Kevin Vasquez Lou Bajuk
Jeff Dixon John Fiala Joshua Liebeskind Kevin Wagner Love Smedfors
Jeff Geisperger John Fitzgerald Joshua Louderback Kevin Whitaker Lowsonic
Jeff H John Gardner Joshua M Eaves Kevin Williams lpaull
Jeff Hincy John Greene Joshua Martinson Kevin Wine Luc Teunen
Jeff Kosko John Hacker Joshua Nicholas Aeria Khan Shawnery Luca Neukom
Jeff Labrack John Hammons Joshua Price Kian Dashti Lucas
Jeff Long John Harper Joshua Smith Kieran McGowan Lucas Cooperberg
Jeff Quick @jefftyjeffjeff John Jenson Joshua Spaw Kieran Swystun Lucas Cowell
Jeff Smith John Kirkland Joshua Straub Killian Kelly Lucas Graves
Jeff Stolarcyk John Lemay JTB3 Kim Long Vo Lucas Horton
Jeff Threatt John Lorinskas JTDimino Kim Mazaraki Lucas Hyon
jeffhar@udel.edu John M. Portley Juan Cruz Balda Berrotarán Kiraah Lucas Katt
Jeffrey John Marron Juan Cruz Vidal Gomez Kirstie Kurtenbach Lucas Ludlow
Jeffrey Allan John Maven Juan Fernández Kirt Dankmyer Lucas Mathias Haasum
Jeffrey Allan Boman John McDuff Juan Raigada Kiwihiker Lucas McDaniel
Jeffrey Chapman John Michael Hess Judd KJ Lucas Rodriguez San Pedro
Jeffrey Doon John Moran Judd M. Goswick KJ Potter Lucas Ward
Jeffrey Elliott John Paul Ashenfelter Jukka Eerikäinen Klaus Ole Kristiansen Lucias Meyer
Jeffrey Fuller John Reaves Julian Knut Ivar Hellsten Lucifer War Machine
Jeffrey Head John Rose Julian Strauch Koen Plate Ludanto
Jeffrey Klingbeil John Roszkowski Julius Wollfarth Jr Koen van Baaren Lukas
Jeffrey Lee John Ryan Jürgen Mayer Koen van der Keijl Luke
Jeffrey Meakins John Snead Jussi Kenkkilä Kon-Tiki Luke Cunningham
Jeleinen John Snee Justin Kosta Kostulas Luke Moran
Jennifer John Stynes Justin Bowen Kovács Zsolt Luke Phillips
Jennifer and Mark Martin John TK Veltman Justin Chan KP McGrath Luke Skeirik
Jennifer Timora Leedell John Ulbrech Justin Hamilton Krister Blystad Luke Stowell
Jens Alm John Unverferth Justin Hein Kristof Klee Luke Thomson
Jens Stegemann Johnathon Grach Justin Koopmans Kristopher Volter Luke Thrower
Jeramie JohnC Justin Miller kschktnt Luke Winters
Jeremias Weber Johnny F. Normal Justin N Lee Kurt McMahon Luke Wootton
Jeremy Jon Davison Justin R. Ky Grage M Newman
Jeremy Baker Jon Finn Justin Reardon Kyle Maahk
Jeremy Friesen Jon Henrik Knapskog Justin Smith Kyle Bedell Mååns Eriksson
Jeremy Frost Jon Kenkel justinsortega@gmail.com Kyle Burckhard Mabel Harper
Jeremy Kear Jon Morris Juuso Pennanen Kyle Duncan Machi
Jeremy Livingston Jon Munger JVMMs Kyle Francoeur Mackenzie
Jeremy Pickard Jon Snodgrass JYK Kyle Kiefer madbird-valiant
Jeremy Reed Jon Walker K-Slacker Kyle McGeeney madkids
Jeremy Scott Jon Wilson K.C. L’Roy Kyle Purkiss Mads Fallesen Johansen
Jerry Jonas Karlsson Kai Mayer kylepip Makki
Jerry Huckins Jonathan “Buddha” Davis kalletaekwondo@hotmail.com KyoshiroKami Malcolm McLeod
Jesper Nilsson Cyren Jonathan “SteelSeraph” Steele Kalman Farago L. Vollum Mangoose
Jesse Alford Jonathan Agens Kamil Glowacki Labbiss ManlyMcBeefington
Jesse Roberge Jonathan Cheatham Karim Dhambri Lachlan Brad Easton Manny
Jessie Hickman Jonathan Cliffen Karl Erik Hofseth Lachlan Jones Mantakree
Jett Jonathan Fish Karl Forster Laith Noaman Marc Plourde
Jidairo Jonathan Goodwins Karl Hendricks Lakshman Marc Tabyanan
Jill Enke Jonathan Korman Karl Lanzetta Lance “UndeadViking” Myxter Marc Young
Jim Jonathan Sherlock Karl Miller Larry Hamilton (Follow Me, Marcelo Paschoalin
Jim Alcala Sales Jonathon Byrer Karl Scheer And Die!) Marco
Jim DelRosso Joonas Laakso Karsing Larry Haught Marco Grosso
Jim Dixon Jordan ‘Sendo’ Hardy Kary “Realm Master K” LaughingShadows Marcus
Jim Hart Jordan Lee Thompson Williams Lauren Bond Marcus Burggraf
Jim May Jordan Raymond Kascade Lauretha Marcus Rosenfeld
Jim Montgomery Jordan White Kat Enyeart Lazytron Margaret Norris
Jim Morris Jordi Rabionet Hernandez Keegan Lindgren Le Collen Mario Moreau
Jim Sharples Jörg S. Keiran Sparksman Leah Elliott Mark
Jim Stryker Jose Alarico Teixeira Manzano Keith C. Datum Lee Corder Mark A. Siefert
Jim Young José Gilberto Olimpio Bezerra Keith Davies Lee Graham Mark Andrew Faulkner
Jimmy Gaylord Júnior Keith E. Hartman Lee Moran Mark Barr
Jimmy Gertzog José Luiz F. Cardoso Keith Mantell Lee Perry Mark Carter
Joakim Jonsson José Morillo Keith Mount LegionForty2 Mark Collins
João Mariano Jose Roberto Vidal Keith Nelson Len Borowski Mark Delsing
Jodi Pink José Sánchez Kelly Jolliffe Len Smith Mark Giordano
Joe Bongi Jose W. L. Kelly Roberge Lena B Mark H
Joe Campbell Joseph Kelsa Leonard Brey Mark Harris
Joe Hradec Joseph Anderson Kelton Lawrence Leopold Stiegler Mark Jones
Joe Ingledew Joseph Avolio Ken Bradfield Lerolabell Mark Kostecky
Joe Main Joseph Bohan Ken Pawlik Lethio Mark Kriozere
Joe Robinson Joseph Gerard Fredette Ken Taylor Levi Burtner Mark Laird
Joel Joseph Glover Ken Wen Lee Lewis Cassidey Mark Lemmon
Joel Dunkelberg Joseph Hacker Kenik Liam Butler Mark MacDougal
Joely Joseph Kim Kenneth Hite Liam Foley Mark Malone
Joey Schuringa Joseph Lafayette Kenneth Walz Liam Murray Mark Miller
Johan Fält Joseph LaMothe Kennon Ballou liamscotthanson93@gmail. Mark O’Mealey
Johan Kristian Worm Joseph Montano Kenny com Mark Quinn Corcoran
Johannes Paavola Joseph Scarpace Kenny Crouch Lian Mark Stanley
John Joseph Thorne Kenny Murray Lilian Duault Mark Story
John “evernevermore” Scheib Joseph Wheeler Kerry Clarkson Lily / LilypadNebula Markku
John “johnkzin” Rudd Josh Kesipyc Linda L. Martelle Markus Raab
John “Redring” Love Josh ‘Tallknight’ Higgins Keven McDaniels Lisa Padol Markus Sommer
John Anderson Josh Brauer Kevin Lithran Markus Viklund
John Baldwin Josh Cairns Kevin Brennan Lloyd Rasmussen Marley Griffin
John Barr Josh D. Kevin Chauncey Logan Hyvonen MarsSenex
John Cohen Josh Olsby Kevin Cook Logan Laberge Martin
John Connelly Josh Peters Kevin Dale Loïc Cremer Martin Cliffen
John Courtney Josh Rasey Kevin Kostello Lolta Martin Greening
John Daly Josh Rudolph Kevin Martin Longdirt Harri Martin Hrádela
John Davies Josh Sjothun Kevin Mayz Lonni Swanson Martin Krebs
John DePaul Josh Williams Kevin McHale Lorange Martin Mörtsell



320• Backers

Martin Nichol Michael Gissing Nathan Milfull Paris Conte Qurrion
Martin Teasdale-Blais Michael Hengeli Nathan Reetz Pat Slauson Racheal Miller
Marty Michael Hvorecny Nathan Schmitz Patrick Brannick Raf Bressel
Marty Price Michael King Nathaniel Bennett Patrick Brewer Rafal Kita
Martyn Meeks Michael Krzak Nathaniel Foster Patrick Buckendorf Rahshaad Benjamin
Marzio Spairani Michael Law Nathaniel Lanza Patrick Cigno Ralph Mazza
Masaki Yamazaki Michael Littlejohn Nathaniel McIntyre Patrick Delisle Randall Orndorff
Mathew Roy Mckendry Michael Lizardi Neal Allen Patrick Emery Randall Thyodore
Matias B Michael Lombardo Neal Dalton Patrick Fagan Raphaël
Matías Nicolás Caruso Michael Loy Necrozius Patrick Pilgrim Raphael Bombayl
Matt Michael MacPherson Neil Roach Patrick Riley Raskal
Matt ‘Haxar’ Shaw Michael Mase Neil Woodhouse Patrick Sullivan Ray Goerke
Matt “9littlebees” Kay Michael Mazzei Nerdwerds Patrick Trapp Ray M. H.
Matt “Catapult” Wang Michael Mundy Nerra Patrick Young Ray Nolan
Matt Bauer Michael Paul Nessalantha Patryk Adamski ‘Ruemere’ Raymond Barnes
Matt Caulder Michael Paulini Nethulmeow Patryk Misiapa rebtonguewriter@gmail.com
Matt Helms Michael Pearson Newton Grant Paul Recknar
Matt Jorgenson michael pfeiffer Ngo Vinh-Hoi Paul “Ettin” Matijevic Red
Matt Logan Michael Pineda Niall Boyd Paul “Trkhellian” Morgan Redsean
Matt Melero Michael Pruitt Niall O’Donnell Paul Amala Reg Langford
Matt Sheridan Michael Ramsey Nicholas “Snuggly Wuggums” Paul Beakley Reginald
Matt Wilson Michael Rice Baughman Paul Courtenay Reid San Filippo
Mattaui Michael Sanders Nicholas Bronson Paul Duffy Reise, Reise
Matteo Signorini Michael Schulz Nicholas Cadigan Paul Evans Rema Casprowiak
Matteo Squillari Michael Shollar Nicholas Cassidy Paul Friswold Rev. Keith Johnson
Matthäus Cebulla Michael Smith Nicholas Clements Paul Harrison Rhialto the Marvellous
Matthew Michael Thompson Nicholas Emricson Paul Jenkinson Ricardo Costa
Matthew Aaron Michael Vitousek Nicholas G. Rais Paul Kalupnieks Ricardo Fuente
Matthew Arbo Michael Waters Nicholas Goehring Paul Kohler Riccardo “Malbet” Caverni
Matthew Asztalos Michael Wolf Nicholas Hall Paul Mertz Rich Lescouflair
Matthew B Michael Wright Nicholas Lee Goodman Paul Messenger Rich Wermske
Matthew Barr Michael Yater Nicholas Muehlenweg Paul Mitchener Richard
Matthew Caron Micheal Nicholas Priebe Paul Morell Richard ‘Scylld’ Comfort
Matthew Cicchillo Michel Cayer Nicholas Whaling Paul Sheppard Richard ‘Vecna’ Hussey
Matthew Craner Michel Polisena-Petrelli Nick Paul Umbers Richard ‘Vidiian’ Greene
Matthew Elcock Micky Nick Boughton Pavel Ojeda Richard “Bondo” Bondurant
Matthew Franklin Miguel Alvim de Almeida Nick Bower Paweł Litewka Richard Barton
Matthew Gagan Miguel Angel Castro Nick Carruthers pdcurry Richard Budop III
Matthew Grant Mikael Bergström Nick Comber Pedion Modular Battlefields Richard Comfort
Matthew Jacques Mikael Hansson Nick Pilon Pedro Salgado Richard Cumberland
Matthew Joel Stewart Mikael Oliger Nick R. Pedro-Juan Ferrer Richard Dill
Matthew Kinde Mikael Theorin Nick Roach Pedro(Te) Richard Ellis
Matthew Koelling Mikael Tysvær Nick Roland Penny Lantern Richard Franey
Matthew Miller Mike “Laz” MacMartin Nick Ventricelli Per Olav Richard Gregory
Matthew Nixon Mike “The Viking” May Nick Zakhar Pestilence Richard Leonard
Matthew O’Connor Mike (wrathofzombie) Evans Nicklas Andersson Pete Ho Richard Ling
Matthew Sciscione Mike Campagna Nickolas Pete Petrusha (Imagining Richard Mundy
Matthew Shaver Mike Carlson Nickolay Golubev Games) Richard O’Loughlin
Matthew Stark Mike Fletcher Nicolas Brian Peter Agg Richard Powell
Matthew Tucker Mike Lange Nicole Karel Peter Bogdasarian Richard Rivera
Matthew Tyler Mike Loranger Nigel Clarke Peter Browning Richard Ross
Matthew Walden Mike M Nigel the Leptopus Peter Colletti Richard Ruane
matthew walker Mike Marshall Nik May Peter Engebos Richard T. Balsley
Matthew Young Mike Nusbaum Nikita Levedis Peter Gates Richard Watkins
MatthewB Mike Quintanilla Niklas Herbold Peter Griffith Richzrd, Dark Lord of All
Matthias Haan Mike Reilly Niklas Österholm Peter Mazzeo Rick Arneson
Max English Mike Sands Nikolai Peter Olfelt Rihards
Max Kless Mike Suderman Nikolaos Deligiannidis Peter Smith Riley Chandler
Max Perman Mike0815 Nikolay Samsonov Peter Smits Rimvidas Gabrėnas
Max S Mikey Free Nils Mahrwald Peter Stals Rob Abrazado
Max W ‘Prometheus’ Mikolaj Ninh Qui Do PeterThomas6 Rob Lowe
Maxime Girard Miles Griffiths Nipper Phinizy Petri Virtanen Rob Malo
Maxwell Baker Miles Nerini Noah Phil Corpuz Rob Miles
Maxwell Kennington III Misha Lumen Noah Caleb Philip Rob Nadeau
Maxwell Madden Mitch Lovell Noah Connally Philip Adler Rob of the North
Maxwell Paige Mitchel Pigsley Noah Doyle Philip healy Rob Sansone
MClodi Mitchell Hannan Noah Price McGillivray Philip Kristoffersen Rob Thomas
Medawolf Mitchell Pipes Noël Philip Schneider Rob Wieland
Megan Coppock Mitchell Silverman Noofle Philip Stein Rob Young
Mel Hall Montgomery Fort Odin Collins Philip Williams Robert
Mel White MoosenHammer Ogre Philippe “Sildoenfein” D. Robert Adair
Melanie Ngo Mordecai Oh Seung Han Philippe Daigneault Robert Clampitt
Melissa Matos Moritz Boehm Ola Håkansson Philippe Gamache Robert Conley
Metal Fatigue Morry Veer oldstevo Philippe Jofresa Robert Davis
Michael Morten Oliver Gibney Philippe Marcil Robert Day
Michael “Mammut” Sauer Morten F Grosvold Oliver Lind Philippe Marichal Robert DiDomenico
Michael almond Mr. Encyclopedia Oliver Summers Phill Calle Robert G. Male
Michael Beekman MrTripleCC Ols Jonas Petter Olsson Phillip McGregor Robert Hysing Berg
Michael Bogumill Munashe Omari Brooks Phillip Roszko Robert Kempe
Michael Bower Murray Corradini Omer Golan-Joel Phillip Stephen Wright Robert Kim
Michael Bowman Mythforger Oneil Phoenix8008 Robert Kosek
Michael Brewer Naas Orffen Phoenixabo Robert Lai
Michael Calarco Nachofan Oscar Diez Martinez Phurl Robert Mazique
Michael Cody Meyer Nachtf lug Oscar Söderbäck Phyrexus Robert Miller
Michael Collins Nadia Debogori Otis Martin Physicsmason@gmail.com Robert Mohl
Michael D Namdorg Oubliette PickleTheCat Robert Morrison
Michael D Lusby Nancy Feldman Owen Pierre-Philippe Renaud Robert Mull
Michael David Pereira Nat Webb Owen Davies PillB Robert Oertly
Michael Demchak Nate Hiers Owen Thompson Pixel_Kitty Robert Ott
Michael Derry Nathan Owlglass Planet Deathstar Robert Parini
Michael DiBlasio Nathan Birch Oz Mills Pol Garcia i Oto Robert Saint John
Michael Doa Nathan Cashman p7 Poul Meyer Robert Simpson
Michael Durkee Nathan Christenson Pablo Pérez Gómez Preston Bruce Robert Wiesehan
Michael Ellison Nathan Easton Pablo Saldaña Prospero101 Robert William Crocker
Michael Feldhusen Nathan Ellsworth Pandatheist psychicblue Robert Wockner
Michael G. Palmer Nathan Gaudry Paolo & Kyra pulsemeat Roberto López Arnau
Michael G. Potter Nathan Joy Paolo Robino Puppetminion Roberto Nieves



Backers •321 

Robertson Sondoh Jr Scott Skene Steve Hyatt Tiffany Korta Vance Rawson
Robin Droste Scott Thede Steve Pugh Tim Bruning Veronica Wakefield-Cooper
Robin Schoonover Scott Tooker Steve Thompson Tim D Vex Godglove
Robin Wenström Scott Udall Steve Van Gorder Tim Fowler Vicknesh Suppramaniam
Rodney J Kelly Scott Whitehurst Stevec Tim Goodfellow Victor Grinevskii
Roger Smith SeaGnome Steven Tim H Victor Serrano
Roger Snyder Sean Steven A Murray Tim Knapp Victor Suarez
Rogue Comet Sean ‘Ariamaki’ Riedinger Steven Bakker Tim Rudloff Victor Zammit
Rogue Fithp Sean Ebersviller Steven Cornell Tim Smith Vidal Bairos
Rolf Laun Sean Hinphy Steven Fetter Timecrash Vincent Eskilsson
Ron Sean Mannion Steven G Timo van Balen Vincent Newkirk
Ron Beck Sean Mattox Steven Locke Timolution Vincent Yasi
Ron Boero Sean Richmond Steven Lord timonen90@hotmail.com Vincente Gonsalves
Ross Cowman Sean Rivera Steven Roman Timothy Violet Cason
Ross Mills Sean Silva-Miramon Steven Sparkman Timothy Carroll Vlad Zsariski
Ross Smith Sean Smith Steven Stone Timothy Carter Vojtech Pribyl
Rowan Lloyd Sean Trader Steven Wales Timothy Huygens Von Redrikk Allenegui
Rowell Seany Steven Warble Timothy Lam VonEther
Roy Church SeaWyrm Steven Ward Timothy McGowan Vony256
rsdockery Sebastian Stew Wilson Timothy Samuel Whitworth Vorindi
Ruben Navarro Sebastian Banzet Storapan Tobey Feeley Vorpal Rapier
Ruhuka Sébastien Mailier Storium / Stephen Hood Tobias Dahlberg W. David Pattison
Rus Ketcham secondrevan Stras “Space Cowboy” Todd Agthe Wade Patterson
Russell Saur SeeleyOne Acimovic Todd McCorkle wadledo
Russell Townsend semiomant Stuart Keith Rabson Todd Phillip Hansen Wajanai Snidvongs
Russell Ventimeglia Sergio Silvio Herrera Gea Susan Mair Toju Xinshu Walt
RustingKnight Seth A Spurlock Suwaree Tom Androy Wannes Ooms
RVH Seth Day Suzi Tom Bolenbaugh Warren
Ryan SGM Sven Scheurer Tom Cifelli Warren Nelson
Ryan Anderson sgreimann SwiftOne Tom Foolery Pritchard Waste93
Ryan Bearrick Shad Corliss Sylvain Martel Tom Lommel Wayne Clemmer
Ryan Crowe Shadowriku Sylvestre Picard Tom McGrenery Wayne Grelle
Ryan Estep ShaggyTh3Dog Sythmaster Tom Shen Wes
Ryan James Kolodziejczak Shale Crom Taichara Tom White Wes Fournier
Ryan Junk Shaleblade Tamoline tom.kalbf leisch@gmail.com Wes Makin
Ryan Kent Shan Lewis Tamuz Tomas B. C. Wesley E. Marshall
Ryan Lybarger Shane Tanner Clark Tomas J Skucas Wesley S. Batson
Ryan McCarter Shane C Tanner Yea Tomas Rocha Martins wetgauntlet
Ryan Meier Shane Dunlap Tapani Moilanen Tomer Gurantz whitewolfzita
Ryan Moore Shane Gallocher Targaff Tomio Widdershins
Ryan Nunes Shane Jackson Tarkom Tone Berg Wilhelm Fitzpatrick
Ryan O’Connor Shane Phillips Taylor Bleir Toni P. Will Bryant
Ryan Percival Shane Starr Taylor Goehring Toni Rheker Will Dawson
Ryan St. Wrba Shane Trapp Taylor LaBresh Tony A. Thompson Will Gaffey
Ryan Wiegert Shawn Meyer Tazdrin Tony Digaetano Will Konijn
Ryan Ziegler Shawn Wood Team AlecSanChar Tony Lin Will Mitchell
Rysa Sheldon Ted Tony Patterson Will Smith
S. Kilian Shelly Consoli Tefmon Topcc William
Saajan 9000 Sheringford Hope Tegan Smith Torstein Rødset William Anderson
Sabastian Shervyn Tehjo Toryn William Fischer
Sage Barton Simon Brunning Temmo Cramer Toy Spears William Hensley
Sage LaTorra Simon Carter Tentreto Trampas Johnson William Hochella
Saila Oikelmus Simon Geard Teorius Travis Cannon William J. Decker
Salva Campoy Simon Jennings Terrasaur Travis Coker William James Dowie
Sam Simon Joseph Brown Terry Gilbert Travis Geery William Kirk
Sam CB Simon Plain Terry Kolhoff Travis Wright William McCleery
Sam Curry Simon Smalley TextBasedBob Trent Hamm William Nourse
Sam Garamy Simon Stroud Thanasis Tsiakmakis Trevor Bailey William P
Sam Genoese Sir Aldi The Cartularium Trevor Bammel William Sainty
Sam Hawken SirJAGman The Cold Flames of Eternity Trevor Fish William Strickling
Sam Hillaire Skye The Demolissionary Trevor Hannon Willoxq
Sam Hinshaw Skylar The Elderf lower Trevor McDonald Willy Dustis, Esq.
Sam Lawton Smith The Enigmatic Cakelord Trevor Proffitt Workshop
Sam Malcolm Snake The Lost King Trevor Sheldrake Xander
Sam Phoenix Soap The Rooster Trevor Turner Xander Guzman
Sam Slocum Sohrab Zolfaghari The Rosenthal Family Trevor Waggoner Xanmyral
Sam Zeitlin Sol Extract thegreat93 Trip Space-Parasite Xavi Nieto
Samantha Solin Outlander thekingtiger8 Tripleyew xtheflysamuraix
Sami Cyberpilot Veillard Sophia Brandt TheMunkis Tristan Chester Yann Raoul
Samir SoSo_Tsundere Theo Tristan Harness Yellowrobe
Samjoko Publishing Spencer Sandoval TheOnlyWes Tristan Stewart Yeran
Samoel Di Wilsleff Spencer Wankier Theophenes Troy LaGro Yodoza
Samuel Spenser A Rubin TheRustyScale Troy Otway Yongi
Samuel Doepken Spenser Isdahl Thien Nguyendo Trylden Yossi and Dad Siragher
Samuel Klingensmith Spyros Stavropoulos Thierry De Gagné tunglashr You Don’t Meet In An Inn
Samuel Puddleduck Spyros Veronikis Thomas Brindley Turbiales Young-hoon Lee
Samuel Schuerch Stacy Forsythe Thomas Egebak TurboGuy16 Yragael
Sara Waits Stanley Huang Thomas Franz Tyler Zac W
Sarick Stargazer Thomas Green Tyler Brunet Zach
Sarutomaseth@gmail.com Stefan Lahr Thomas Günther Estabrook Tyler Frazier Zach Alexander
Sascha Weber Stefan M. Feltmann Thomas Ladegard Tyler Hunt Zach Edwards
Sasha Thirlby-Flynn Steff Bisinger Thomas P. Kurilla Tyler Justin Zach Gauthier
Saturn McLaughlin Stephan Thomas Rim Tyler Martinez Zachary B. Rogan
Savannah Casto Stephan Szabo Thomas Scroggs Tyler Potter Zachary Bryan
Scott Stephanie Bryant Thomas Tatum Tyler Rennell Zachary Pilarski
Scott Caslow Stephanie Turner Thomas Vanstraelen Tyler Wirth Zachary Wysk
Scott Donatti Stephen Thomas Walters Tyrian zachary.callen@gmail.com
Scott Ferreira Stephen L. Thomas Whittaker Ubiratan Pires Alberton Zack MacDonald
Scott Gomoll Stephen Lewis Thor Hansen Universal Knight Zak Gordon
Scott Hess Stephen Paterson Thorin Messer Uqbarian Zeb Berryman
Scott Hill Steve Thoryn Haylett Uwe Schumacher Zelix
scott jenks Steve Burchett thraggon@gmail.com Vaclav G. Ujcik Zera Veronica Day
Scott Maynard Steve Bush ThrustBomb Valkyness Zyfram
Scott Morrison Steve Cooper Tibor Kosa Valle Fabio Zynx 
Scott P McClellan Steve Dodge Tiernan Valthek
Scott Serro Steve Guetre Tiernán Ó hAlmhain Valtteri Rantamäki